## Verse 1

    īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sachchidānanda-vigrahaḥ
    anādir ādir govindaḥ sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

### Translation

The Supreme Lord, the embodiment of truth, consciousness and joy, is Govinda Kṛṣṇa. He is beginningless, the origin of all that be, and the cause of all causes.

### Purport

With His personal eternal Name, eternal Form, eternal Qualities and eternal Pastimes, Kṛṣṇa alone shines resplendent above all other entities as the Supreme. The Name 'Kṛṣṇa' is His eternal Name that proclaims Him to be the Supreme Existence by His characteristic of attracting the love of all beings. His form of concentrated truth (sat), consciousness (chit) and joy (ānanda), of two-armed humanlike feature and charming heavenly dark blue (Śyāmasundar) hue, holding the flute (Muralīdhar), is His personal eternal character.

By the power of His own inconceivable potency, despite His almighty majestic nature, in His charming medium-sized form He attracts all that be; in that eternal form, His nature as the autocrat possessing miraculous transcendental qualities, senses, etc., is unique with all embracing harmony. Truth, immortal consciousness and divine ecstasy have their full glory in Him, with absolute concentrated intensity.

Paramātmā the Omnipresent Supersoul, the Almighty God or Īśvara—Viṣṇu the Preserver—is but the portion of His intrinsic self, manifest within the mundane world. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is the one and only Supreme Godhead or Parameśvar (*Īśvaraḥ Paramaḥ Kṛṣṇaḥ*). Although His infinite transcendental senses and qualities are all clearly distinct from one another, by His inconceivable potency they are perfectly situated, eternally appearing in the one absolutely charming, unrivalled transcendental form. That divine form is the self of Kṛṣṇa, and the self of Kṛṣṇa is that divine form. His divine form is the entity of absolute concentrated intensity of being, cognizance and ecstasy; and so the attributeless, formless Spirit or Brahman, the unconcentrated principle of being, cognizance and bliss, is merely the bodily effulgence of that entity of absolute concentrated intensity.

The divine intrinsic form of Kṛṣṇa is in itself without origin, and it is the origin of Brahman and Paramātmā. That selfsame Kṛṣṇa, who is served by Śrī, the original Goddess of Fortune, is Govinda—who may be viewed according to His Pastimes as Gopati, the Lord of the cows; Gopapati, the Lord of the cowherds; Gopīpati, the Lord of the cowherd damsels; Gokulapati, the Lord of the divine village on Earth where cows flourish; and Golokapati, the Lord of the divine abode of cows. As both predominator and predominated, He is the cause of all causes: incited by the glance of His fractional predominative descent (Puruṣ-avatār) form of Paramātmā, His predominated inferior potency creates the material world. The unlimited individual souls or jīvas are the manifest marginal potency rays of effulgence emanating from that Paramātmā. This holy book establishes the supremacy of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and thus the auspicious invocation to the book is accomplished by chanting His Name.
