## Verse 2

    sahasra-patra-kamalaṁ gokulākhyaṁ mahat-padam
    tat-karṇikāra-tad-dhāma tad-anantāṁśa-sambhavam

### Translation

(In this verse, the transcendental abode \[dhām\] of Gokula, the seat of the Pastimes of divinely playful Śrī Kṛṣṇa is being described.) The superexcellent abode of Kṛṣṇa is Gokula; it is eternally manifest through a portion of the Infinite (Ananta). This abode takes the shape of a unique divine lotus flower possessing thousands of petals, the core of which is Kṛṣṇa's own home.

### Purport

Gokula, which is identical with Goloka, is not created or mundane. Kṛṣṇa's infinite potency is ever expanding, and Kṛṣṇa's divine alter ego, Baladev, is the reservoir of that potency. The infinite aspect of the transcendental entity of Baladev is twofold, encompassing both transcendence and mundanity. One quadrant of the Lord's majesty is mundane infinity (ekapāda-vibhūti), and that will be discussed in the appropriate place. The transcendent infinity is the Lord's triquadrantal majesty (tripāda-vibhūti), or the place of no lamentation, death or apprehension; and that domain is by nature effulgent in the sense that it is the transcendental kingdom. That kingdom is the manifest majesty of the Almighty, the great Vaikuṇṭha or the unlimited transcendental spiritual world, Paravyoma.

Beyond the purview of material nature, on the far shore of the river of passivity, Virajā, that domain presides in all its glory, eternally surrounded by the spiritual effulgence of Brahman. The upper region of that infinite divine majesty is the abode of absolute sweetness and charm—Gokula or Goloka, which is the ultimate portion of the splendour of the spiritual world eternally manifest in its beauty to the extreme. This is referred to by some authorities as the abode of Mahā-Nārāyaṇ, the great Nārāyaṇ, or Mūla-Nārāyaṇ, the original Nārāyaṇ. Thus Gokula, identical with Goloka, is the superexcellent abode. That one holy abode is resplendent as Goloka and Gokula according to their different locations, upper and lower respectively.

Śrīmat Sanātan Goswāmī has stated in his *Śrī Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛtam*, which embodies the essence of all holy scriptures: *yathā krīḍati tad bhūmau goloke 'pi tathaiva saḥ adha-ūrddhvatayā bhedo 'nayoḥ kalpate kevalam*. The meaning is that in Gokula, which is manifest in this material world, Kṛṣṇa sports in His divine Pastimes in exactly the same way as He does in Goloka. There is no difference between Goloka and Gokula except that Goloka is situated at the topmost region of the spiritual plane, and that selfsame place of Kṛṣṇa's Pastimes is manifest as Gokula in this world.

Śrī Jīva Goswāmī has also elucidated in his *Ṣaṭ-sandarbha, goloka-nirūpaṇaṁ; vṛndāvanādīnāṁ nitya-kṛṣṇa-dhāma-tvaṁ; goloka-vṛndāvanayor ekatvañ cha*: Although Goloka and Gokula are identical, by dint of Kṛṣṇa's inconceivable potency Goloka is the topmost plane of the transcendental world while Gokula, situated in Maṭhurā Maṇḍal or Maṭhurā province, is revealed within the insignificant quadrant of the Lord's majesty that issues forth from His deluding māyā potency as the mundane world. It lies beyond the faculty of the jīva's puny intellect to conceive how the divine abode, despite being the vast triquadrantal majesty of God, comes to be accommodated in the nether-regions of the quadrant of the mundane majesty; and it is demonstrative of the greatness of Kṛṣṇa's inconceivable potency.

The entity of Gokula is the divine abode, immeasurable and unlimited in any way by material time, space or circumstances despite being manifest in the material world; Gokula remains self-effulgent, ever unrestricted as supreme unlimited reality (Parama-Vaikuṇṭha-tattva). Yet the conditioned souls, due to their absorption in materialism, cannot resist dragging even Gokula to the level of their mundane senses and intellect. Through their individual defective senses and intelligence they see even the divine abode of Gokula in a mundane way, just as the shortsighted observer considers that the sun is covered by a cloud when in fact it is only his eyes that are covered.

Only one who by great fortune has had his relationship with mundanity completely dissipated can see Goloka in Gokula and Gokula in Goloka. The enlightenment (jñāna) attained from the bliss-consciousness of the soul, through its own assiduous discernment of non-reality from reality, has never been known to catch a glimpse of the area of Vaikuṇṭha. That realm is situated above the unconcentrated truth, consciousness and bliss of the elementary Brahman or nondifferentiative Absolute; thus, there is no chance of having a divine vision of Goloka or Gokula by such jñāna or self-exertive attempts at enlightenment. This is so because the cultivators of jñāna, the liberationists, search for the reality while wholly depending upon their own finer perceptions, but they ignore the quest for the grace of Kṛṣṇa, who is full of inconceivable potencies. Hence the liberationists' attempt for monistic self-realization is futile in the matter of reaching Goloka-Vṛndāvan.

As a limb of the exploitational or karma attempt, the meditational or yoga attempt is similarly impotent in drawing the Lord's grace; therefore it cannot have any success in the quest for the plane of transcendental dynamism beyond the 'oneness' of Brahman. Only those who adopt pure devotion or śuddha-bhakti can attain the grace of Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of inconceivable potencies; and only by Kṛṣṇa's grace is one's relativity with the mundane illusory nature dispelled and the fortune of seeing Gokula born.

In this regard there are two basic types of perfection in devotion or bhakti-siddhis, namely, perfection of one's intrinsic divine self during his sojourn in this world or svarūpa-siddhi, and perfection upon departure from the mortal world or vastu-siddhi. In svarūpa-siddhi, Goloka is seen in Gokula, and in vastu-siddhi Gokula is seen in Goloka—this is a profound mystery.

With the attainment of prema or divine love, svarūpa-siddhi is attained; after that, vastu-siddhi occurs when both the gross and subtle illusory coverings of the conditioned soul are removed by Kṛṣṇa's sweet will. In any case, until one attains perfection in devotion or bhakti-siddhi, he will see Gokula as separate from his conception of Goloka.

With myriads of petals, the unique transcendental seat of unending marvels is Gokula, the eternal divine abode of Kṛṣṇa.
