## Verse 3

    karṇikāraṁ mahad-yantraṁ ṣaṭ-koṇaṁ vajra-kīlakam
    ṣaḍaṅga-ṣaṭpadī-sthānaṁ prakṛtyā puruṣeṇa cha
    premānanda-mahānanda-rasenāvasthitaṁ hi yat
    jyotīrūpeṇa manunā kāma-bījena saṅgatam

### Translation

The centre of the divine lotus is the core—Kṛṣṇa's residence. It is presided over by the predominated and predominating moiety. It is mapped as a hexagonal mystic symbol. Like a diamond, the effulgent supreme entity of Kṛṣṇa, the fountainhead of all divine potencies, presides as the central pivot. The great mantra of eighteen syllables, which is formed of six integral parts, is manifest as a hexagonal place with sixfold divisions.

### Purport

Kṛṣṇa's līlā or Pastimes are of two basic types, either manifest or unmanifest. The Pastimes of Vṛndāvan that may be revealed to the vision of humans is manifest Kṛṣṇa-līlā, whereas that which remains invisible to the eye is unmanifest Kṛṣṇa-līlā. In Goloka, the unmanifest līlā is ever manifest, and in Gokula the manifest līlā is manifest to the worldly eye when Kṛṣṇa wills it.

Śrīla Jīva Goswāmī has stated in his *Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha, aprakaṭa-līlātaḥ prasūtiḥ prakaṭa-līlāyām abhivyaktiḥ*: "Manifest līlā is the revelation of unmanifest līlā." It is also further said in *Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha, śrī-vṛndāvanasya prakāśa-viśeṣo golokatvam; tatra prāpañchika-loka-prakaṭa-līlāvakāśatvenāvabhāsamānaṁ prakāśo goloka iti samarthanīyam*. The meaning is that any 'interval' which is found in Kṛṣṇa's manifest līlā in the illusory world is filled by those Pastimes that have their subtle presence in the background in an unmanifest way; they are the Pastimes of Goloka or Goloka-līlā.

So all these points are harmonized by Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī in his *Laghu-Bhāgavatāmṛtam*: *yat tu goloka-nāma syāt tach cha gokula-vaibhavam; tādātmya-vaibhavatvañ cha tasya tan mahimonnateḥ*—Goloka is the transcendental manifestation of the higher transcendental glories of Gokula. So Goloka is simply the selfsame manifestation of the majesty of Gokula.

Although each and every Pastime of Kṛṣṇa is not manifest in Gokula, all His Pastimes are eternally manifest in Goloka. The revelation to the conditioned souls of the unmanifest līlā of Goloka—Goloka being the selfsame majestic manifestation of Gokula—is of two types, namely through worship by mantra (mantropāsanāmayī) and by pure spontaneity (svārasikī). Śrī Jīva Goswāmī has explained in his writings that any one of the various locations and associated circumstances of the divine Pastimes have their constant localized existence, and so may be meditated upon by the appropriate mantra. The meditational revelation of Goloka that arises from the constant localized mantra meditation upon a location corresponding to a singular Pastime is *mantropāsanāmayī-līlā*. But those Pastimes that pervade many localities with manifold divine sports and revelries are full of variegated spontaneity, and thus they are svārasikī; that is, they are revealed to the devotees whose transcendental spontaneity has matured.

Both meanings are in this verse. Firstly, in the Pastimes indicated in eighteen syllables, the bases of the mantra are delegated their appropriate localities in order that each one manifest a particular Pastime of Kṛṣṇa: *klīṁ kṛṣṇāya govindāya gopījana-vallabhāya svāhā*. This mantra is said to be formed of six integral parts of six metric bases, which are (1) *Kṛṣṇāya* (2) *Govindāya* (3) *Gopījana* (4) *Vallabhāya* (5) *Svā* and (6) *Hā*. The formation of the mantra is thus shown to be the consecutive placement of these six limbs.

The great hexagonal mystic symbol (or circle of the Lord's dominion, mahad-yantra) is explained as follows: the seed (bīja), the impelling principle or desire-seed (kāma-bīja)—klīṁ—is the central pivot within the symbol. By concentrating one's thoughts upon the transcendental truth with the help of such a formula, one can attain perception of the truth as Chandradhvaja (Lord Śiva) did.

The Teachings of *Gautamīya Tantra* state: *svā-śabdena cha kṣetrajña heti chit-prakṛtiḥ parā*: The word svā indicates kṣetrajña or the soul, and hā indicates the higher transcendental nature. According to *Śrī-Haribhakti-vilās, uttarād govindāyety asmāt surabhiṁ go-jātiṁ; tad uttarād gopījanety asmāt vidyāś chaturdaśa, tad uttarād vallabha*, etc.

In this line, one may have realization of a localized Pastime through the agency of worship by the mantra. This is the objective of worship by mantra.

The general purport is that one who is deeply aspiring to enter into Kṛṣṇa's divine Pastimes must, with proper perspective of his relationship in the Absolute (sambandha-jñāna) born of devotional serving disposition (bhakti-rasa), render service unto Kṛṣṇa with the spiritual inner self. One's relationship with the divinity is established when this intrinsic knowledge is realized: (1) The intrinsic form of Kṛṣṇa, (2) The intrinsic form of Kṛṣṇa's divine Pastimes in Vraja, (3) The intrinsic form of His intimate attendants, the gopīs, (4) The intrinsic form of full self-surrender unto Kṛṣṇa, in the wake of *tad vallabha*, those who are His most beloved—the gopīs, (5) The pure soul's divine intrinsic form (of divine cognition), and (6) *chit-prakṛti* or the intrinsic divine nature, viz. the intrinsic nature of the soul to render divine service unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

One who is properly established in such relativity in the Absolute attains firmness (niṣṭhā) in the soul's engagement in divine practice (abhidheya), and comes to know the only life-nectar or prospect (prayojan) to be the joy of service to the Supreme Male, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in the 'ego' of a predominated maidservant of Śrī Rādhā. This is the underlying purport.

So initially, the 'meditational' Pastimes of Goloka and Gokula may appear in the heart of a devotee in the stage of holy practice (sādhana) through worship by the mantra, and secondly, the unrestrained 'free-willed' Pastimes are revealed to the devotee in the stage of perfection (siddha). This is the general position of Goloka or Gokula, which will be further illumined as the text evolves.

The meaning of *jyotī-rūpeṇa manunā* is that the transcendental purport is revealed in the mantra, and linking that with the transcendental desire (aprākṛta-kāma) of pure love for Kṛṣṇa, the life of one who goes on serving in this line becomes saturated with the supreme ecstasy of joyous love divine or *Premānanda-mahānanda rasa*. Such eternal Pastimes full of love and joy are ever refulgent in Goloka.
