## Verse 5

    chatur asraṁ tat-paritaḥ śvetadvīpākhyam adbhutam
    chatur asraṁ chatur-mmūrtteś chatur-ddhāma chatuṣ-kṛtam
    chaturbhiḥ puruṣārthaiś cha chaturbhir hetubhir vṛtam
    śūlair daśabhir ānaddham ūrddhādho digvidikṣv api
    aṣṭabhir nidhibhir juṣṭam aṣṭabhiḥ siddhibhis tathā
    manu-rūpaiś cha daśabhir dikpālaiḥ parito vṛtam
    śyāmair gauraiś cha raktaiś cha śuklaiś cha pārṣadarṣabhaiḥ
    śobhitam śaktibhis tābhir adbhutābhiḥ samantataḥ

### Translation

(The area surrounding Gokula is being described.) In the outer section of Gokula there is a miraculous quadrangular area extending in four directions, known as Śvetadvīpa. It is divided into four sections on four sides. Each of these divisions are the residences of Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇ, Pradyumna and Aniruddha.

Surrounding this quadruple abode are the four aims of human life, or religiosity, gain, desire and emancipation (dharma-artha-kāma-mokṣa), with their respective inceptive causes, the four Vedas—*Ṛg, Sāma, Yajuḥ* and *Atharva*, which are mantra in constitution. Ten spears are fixed in eight directions[^1] (East, South, West, North, North-east, South-east, South-west and North-west), above, and below. The eight directions are illumined by the eight jewels known as Mahāpadma, Padma, Śaṇkha, Makara, Kachchhapa, Mukunda, Kunda and Nīla, representing the eight perfections.[^2] All ten directions are presided over by ten guards in the form of mantras. The black, golden, red and white associates of the Lord, and the miraculous potencies headed by Vimalā are refulgent all around.

### Purport

Gokula is principally the seat of loving devotion or prema-bhakti, and thus Yamunā, Govardhan and Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa of Vraja Maṇḍal, as manifest in the earthly plane, are all present there. Further, the entire majesty of Vaikuntha pervades in all directions. All the quadruple plenary expansions (chatur-vyūha-vilās) of the Lord are present in Their appropriate locations, and from Them the unlimited transcendental kingdom known as Paravyoma-Vaikuṇṭha extends infinitely.

The emancipation of attaining Vaikuṇṭha, and general religiosity, gain and desire, have their appropriate situation in Gokula in their original seed form. The Vedas are also present, ever singing the glories of the Lord of Gokula. The ten spears of dissuasion fan out in the ten directions to arrest those persons who, without the grace of Kṛṣṇa, attempt to approach or associate with Goloka through contemplation. The vainglorious on the paths of meditation and knowledge-cum-renunciation (yoga, jñāna) who attempt to approach Goloka are thwarted, being pierced by those ten spears. Nirvāṇa or 'self-annihilation' reaches its acme in the plane of Brahman; that plane is only the outer covering of Goloka, in the form of those sharp spears.

From the meaning of śūla or 'spear' is derived triśūla or 'trident'; the trident symbolizes the divisions of the triple worldly qualities (rajas, tamas, sattva) and the threefold aspects of time, or past, present and future. The yogīs on the path of eightfold mysticism or the jñānīs or liberationists in the monism of non-differentiative Brahman who rashly approach Goloka are summarily cut asunder by those tridents which are situated in the ten directions, and they plunge down to the abyss of hopelessness. Those who approach Goloka through the path of devotion inspired by opulence and majesty become enamoured by the eight perfections of animā, etc., and the majestic treasures of Mahāpadma, etc.; they remain there, charmed by the Vaikuṇṭha aspect which constitutes the outskirts surrounding Goloka. Those who are even less intelligent are subordinated by the ten mantra-guards that keep watch over the ten directions, and they regress to the sevenfold mundane plane (headed by Bhūrloka).

Thus, Goloka is practically unknowable and unattainable. There, all the intrinsic forms of the Supreme Lord who propound the dispensations of pure religion for the different ages are ever eager to bestow Their grace upon the devotees who alone reach there through pure loving devotion, śuddha-prema-bhakti. In accordance with Their particular hues, those forms of the Lord are surrounded by Their appropriate associates, and in Gokula, Their abode is Śvetadvīpa.

Therefore, Śrīla Vṛndāvan Dās Ṭhākur, the Vyāsa of *Chaitanya-līlā*, has described Nabadwip town as bearing the name of Śvetadvīpa. The culmination of Gokula Pastimes—Nabadwip Pastimes—are eternally present in Śvetadvīpa. Thus Nabadwip Maṇḍal, Vraja Maṇḍal and Goloka are one identical indivisible truth; They have manifested diversity only by dint of Their endless aspects in the unlimited variegatedness of divine love. In this respect there is another hidden truth that is known, by the direct grace of Kṛṣṇa, to the great saintly devotees who are imbued with loving devotion.

This material world is graded in fourteen basic planes[^3]; the fruitive worker (karmī) gṛhasthas desirous of enjoyment wander throughout the three planes of Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ and Svaḥ. Pacified personalities who are indefatigable in the great vow of brahmacharya, austere and absorbed in truthfulness, by engaging in utterly selfless works move throughout the planes of Maharloka, Janaloka and Tapoloka, up to Satyaloka. In the upper section of Satyaloka is the abode of Lord Brahmā, and above that is the transcendental infinite plane of Vaikuṇṭha which is the abode of Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who reclines on the ocean of milk.

The sannyāsī paramahaṁsas (perfected renunciates) and demons slain by Lord Hari cross the River of Passivity, Virajā; that is, they surpass the entire fourteen planes of the world and attain to the nirvāṇa of extinction of the soul's individuality by merging in the effulgent plane of Brahman. The devotees who adore the Supreme Majesty of the Lord—devotees desirous of emancipation, pure devotees, devotees of loving sentiment, devotees absorbed in love and devotees overwhelmed in love—they all attain a place in Vaikuṇṭha, the transcendental infinite abode of Lord Nārāyaṇ. Only the devotees who are given to the highest sweetness and charm of the love of Vraja, and who faithfully follow the residents of Vraja, can reach Goloka Dhām, the divine abode of Goloka.

By the inconceivable potency of Kṛṣṇa, those devotees are delegated different positions according to their rasas or divine serving dispositions. The devotees who faithfully follow the pure devotion of residents of Vraja are situated in Kṛṣṇaloka, and the devotees who faithfully follow the pure devotion of the residents of Nabadwip are situated in Gauraloka. Those devotees who have equal devotion for both Vraja and Nabadwip attain to the joy of service in both Kṛṣṇaloka and Gauraloka.

Thus, Śrī Jīva Goswāmī has stated in his holy book *Śrī Gopāla-champū, yasya khalu lokasya golokas tathā go-gopāvāsa-rūpasya śvetadvīpatayā chānanyaspṛṣṭaḥ paramaśuddhatā-samudbuddha-svarūpasya tādṛśa-jñānamaya-katipayamātra-prameya-pātratayā tat-tat-paramatā matā, parama-golokaḥ paramaḥ śvetadvīpa iti*: That supreme plane is called 'Goloka' because it is the abode of cows and cowherds—being the supreme abode of ecstatic Pastimes, it is Kṛṣṇa's Own Self; further, that supremely holy plane is known as 'Śvetadvīpa' (White Island) due to a unique quality of its unsullied purity, manifest by its peculiar inconceivable nature as the seat of certain nectarine experiences of a similarly transcendental inconceivable form. Both the supreme Goloka and the supreme Śvetadvīpa forms are inseparably Goloka Dhām.

The underlying purport is that although Kṛṣṇa enjoys His Pastimes in Vraja, He is nonetheless unable to taste the joy of the entirety of rasa or divine ecstasy, and He therefore accepts the heart and halo of Śrī Rādhikā, the female reservoir of His love—and for this purpose, Goloka is manifest eternally as Śvetadvīpa.

We find this illustrated herein: *śrī-rādhāyāḥ praṇaya-mahimā kīdṛśo vānayaivā-, svādyo yenādbhuta-madhurimā kīdṛśo vā madīyaḥ; saukhyañ chāsyā mad anu-bhavataḥ kīdṛśaṁ veti lobhāt, tad bhāvāḍhyaḥ samajani śachīgarbha-sindhau harīnduḥ*. "'What is that great glory of Śrī Rādhā's love? What is My extraordinary loving sweetness and charm that Śrī Rādhā enjoys? And what is the joy Śrī Rādhā feels by experiencing My sweetness and charm?' Yearning to taste these three sentiments, the moon—Kṛṣṇachandra—was born from the ocean of the womb of mother Śachī." Herein is revealed the hidden, deep purport of Śrī Jīva Goswāmī.

It is also stated in the Vedas: *Rahasyaṁ te vadisyāmi—jāhnavī-tīre navadvīpe golokākhye dhāmni govindo dvibhuja gauraḥ sarvātmā mahāpuruṣo mahātmā mahāyogī triguṇātītaḥ sattva-rūpo bhaktiṁ loke kāśyatīti; tad ete ślokā bhavanti—eko devaḥ sarva-rūpī mahātmā gaura-rakta-śyāmala-śveta-rūpaś chaitanyātmā; sa vai chaitanya-śaktir bhaktākāro bhaktido bhaktivedyaḥ*.

"Let me divulge this mystery to you: 'On the bank of the Ganges, in the holy abode of Nabadwip, the selfsame Goloka Dhām, Govinda Gaurachandra appears in a human feature. He is the soul of all souls, the Supreme Lord, the great saintly personality, the great sannyāsī who is the embodiment of pure existence transcendental to the three qualities of material nature. He reveals pure devotion to the world. He is the Lord, one without a second, the embodiment of all aspects of the Absolute, the Supreme Soul and Avatār through the ages in golden, red, black and white hues. He is directly the Supreme Personality of divine cognition replete with all transcendental potency. He advents in the feature of His devotee, He is the bestower of devotion, and He is knowable by devotion'. "

In many scriptural references such as *"āsan varṇās trayaḥ", "Kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣā 'Kṛṣṇaṁ", "yadā paśyaḥ paśyati rukma-varṇaṁ", "Mahān Prabhur vai"*, etc., Gaurachandra is established as identical with Kṛṣṇa. Yet the golden form in which He graciously appears in the eternal abode of Nabadwip, identical with Goloka, where He is ever devoted to tasting the nectar of the divine Pastimes of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa—that golden (Gaura) form also appears in every one of these Vedic statements.

As by the potency of Yogamāyā, or the current of Kṛṣṇa's internal personal potency, His birth and other Pastimes occur in Gokula localized in the earthly plane, similarly, by the same potency of Yogamāyā the golden Lord Gaura's advent from the womb of mother Śachī Devī and all His divine Pastimes occur in Śrī Nabadwip Dhām in the earthly locality.

This divine truth is an axiomatic principle of spiritual science, and not a figment of the imagination subordinate to māyā, the deluding potency.

[^1]: Pūrva, Dakṣiṇa, Paśchima, Uttara, Īśāna, Agni, Nairṛt and Vāyu.

[^2]: *Aṇimā, mahimā, laghimā, prāpti, prākāmya, īśitā, vaśitā*, and *kāmāvasā-yitā*—subtleness, relationship with the elements, lightness, attainment, eternal joy, command, detachment and supreme fulfillment (*Bhā*: 11.15).

[^3]: The seven upper planes are Bhūrloka, Bhuvarloka, Svarloka, Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka, and Satyaloka. The seven lower planes are Tala, Atala, Vitala, Nitala, Talātala, Mahātala and Sutala. Earth is within the plane of Bhūrloka.
