## Verse 8

    niyatiḥ sā ramā-devī tat-priyā tad-vaśaṁ tadā
    tal-liṅgaṁ bhagavān śambhur jyotīrūpaḥ sanātanaḥ
    yā yoniḥ sāparā śaktiḥ kāma-bījaḥ mahadd-hareḥ

### Translation

(That indirect association with Māyā is being described.) The personification of the transcendental potency of the Lord, Ramā Devī, is Destiny, beloved consort of the Supreme Lord. At creation, the appearance of the effulgence of the portion of Kṛṣṇa's plenary portion is Bhagavān Śambhu, the manifest male organ of the divinity—the reflection of the eternal effulgence. Subject to the potency of Destiny, that male symbol is the portion of the Absolute responsible for the generation of the material world. The reproductive potency that evolves from Destiny appears as the female organ, the embodiment of Māyā, the inferior potency. The union of these organs brings forth the existence of the mahat-tattva, which is only a reflection of the Supreme Lord Hari's original seed of desire (kāma-bīja).

### Purport

Being endowed with the creative desire, the plenary expansion of Kṛṣṇa, Saṅkarṣaṇ, takes the initiative in bringing about the creation of the mundane world. Taking the form of the first predominative descent (Puruṣ-avatār), He reclines on the causal waters and casts a glance at Māyā.

That glance is instrumental in the cause of the creation. The twilight image of that reflected effulgence of the Almighty is effectively the organ of generation, Śambhu, which unites with the reproductive paraphernalia of Māyā, the shadow of the Ramā potency. Then, the reflection of the original seed of desire, kāma-bīja, emerges as the mahat-tattva, the great or universal seminal principle, and engages in the creative function. The initial manifestation of the desire created by Mahā-Viṣṇu is known as hiraṇmaya mahat-tattva; it is the mental principle of readiness for universal creation.

The inner conception here is that assuming both the instrumental and efficient causes (nimitta-upādāna), the will of the predominator or puruṣa creates. The instrumental cause is personified as Māyā, who represents the female reproductive organ; the efficient cause is personified as Śambhu, who represents the male generative organ; and Mahā-Viṣṇu is the predominator, or the inaugurator by His will.

The primordial ingredients or substance (pradhāna) is efficient, while the female receptacle principle (prakṛti) is māyā; and the willing factor that unites them is the manifestor of the illusory mundane world, the predominator (puruṣa), who is a plenary expansion of Kṛṣṇa. These three form the agency of universal creation.

The original seed of desire, kāma-bīja, that exists in Goloka, is pure transcendental cognition, and the seed of desire that exists in the material world is a manifestation of the shadow potency personified as Kāli and other forms. Despite being the prototype of māyā, the original seed of desire is infinitely distant from māyā; the mundane seed of desire is an illusory reflection. The process of Śambhu's birth is described in verses ten and fifteen.
