## Verse 9

    liṅga-yony-ātmikā jātā imā māheśvarī prajāḥ

### Translation

The world's entire progeny in Māyā's kingdom is the embodiment of the sexual union of male and female organs.

### Purport

The sovereignty of the Supreme Personality of Godhead covers the entire four quadrants of the infinite majesty of God. Lamentation, death and apprehension are absent in the three quadrants of the Lord's majesty that are the divine abodes of Vaikuṇṭha, Goloka, etc. In this illusory world, all beings from gods to men, etc., along with all their planes of existence, are under the reign of Māyā; here, all that be is efficiently and instrumentally generated, that is, born of sexual union. With all the discoveries of material science, everything knowable is of sexual origin. Trees, plants and even insentient beings are all produced of the union of male and female.

It deserves mention here that although the allusion to male and female organs presupposes a kind of vulgarity, in a scientific context the exposition based on the principle of sexuality is most appropriate and excellent for its profoundness in illustrating elementary principles. The vulgarity felt is nothing more than a concept of social formality, but science and transcendental science cannot compromise the element of truth with mere social formality.

So the application is indispensable in expounding on the primordial principle of the material world, that is, the illusory seed of desire. The predominating potency or masculine active potency and the female potency or predominated active potency are all that is to be understood by the use of such terms herein.
