## Verse 10

    śaktimān puruṣaḥ so yaṁ liṅga-rūpī maheśvaraḥ
    tasminn-āvir abhūl-liṅge mahāviṣṇur jagat-patiḥ

### Translation

Maheśvar Śambhu, the male principle of the efficient cause representing the primal male organ, is united with the instrumental cause represented by his māyā potency. Mahā-Viṣṇu, the Lord of the universe, partially advents within him by the casting of His glance.

### Purport

Śrī Nārāyaṇ, nondifferent from Kṛṣṇa, presides in the Paravyoma, the area of the spiritual world predominated by majesty and reverence. Mahāsaṅkarṣaṇ is one of Śrī Nārāyaṇ's quadruple expansions or Chatur-vyūha, so even He is a plenary portion of Kṛṣṇa's Nārāyaṇ form. By His spiritual potency, Mahāsaṅkarṣaṇ's plenary expansion eternally reclines on the Virajā River, which is situated at the point midway between the transcendental world and the mundane world; and at the time of universal creation He casts a glance at the distant shadow māyā potency.

At that moment, the reflection of the intrinsic form of Godhead in the form of His divine glance—Śambhu, the lord of the pradhān or primordial material elements, the energy of which is personified by his Rudra form—unites with the mundane instrumental cause, māyā; but he is unable to act without being empowered by Mahā-Viṣṇu, who represents the direct divine power of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, the material seminal element (mahat-tattva) can come forth only when Kṛṣṇa's plenary expansion, that is—the primal Avatār Mahā-Viṣṇu who is a plenary portion of Mahāsaṅkarṣaṇ, who is a plenary expansion of Kṛṣṇa—sanctions the mutual function of Śiva's māyā potency and the efficient causal primordial material elements.

With Mahā-Viṣṇu's sanction, the Śiva potency progressively creates ego (ahaṅkāra) and the five basic elements (pañcha-bhūta) of ether, etc., the subtle form of their attributes (sense objects, tanmātra), and the mundane senses of the (conditioned) soul. The individual souls or jīvas emanate as particles of the rays of the effulgence of Mahā-Viṣṇu. This will be elucidated later in this commentary.
