## Verse 15

    vāmāṅgād asṛjad viṣṇuṁ dakṣiṇāṅgāt prajāpatim
    jyotir-liṅga-mayaṁ śambhuṁ kūrcha-deśād avāsṛjat

### Translation

Mahā-Viṣṇu created Viṣṇu from His left side, Prajāpati from His right side, and He created Śambhu, the divine manifested masculine effulgence, from between His eyebrows.

### Purport

Here, Śrī Viṣṇu refers to the individual Antaryāmī or Supersoul present in the hearts of all jīvas, the Kṣīrodakaśāyī Puruṣa reclining on the ocean of milk. Prajāpati or 'primal progenitor' as the Supreme Lord's portion, Hiraṇyagarbha, is distinct from four-headed Brahmā in that he is the seed principle of all the Brahmās of the countless universes. The divine manifested masculine effulgence form of Śambhu is the plenary manifestation of his origin, the original primal male generative Śambhu (who has been described previously).

Viṣṇu is the plenary expansion entity (svāṁśa-tattva) of Mahā-Viṣṇu, and thus He is sarva-Maheśvar or the Supreme Lord of all; and Prajāpati Brahmā and Śambhu are Mahā-Viṣṇu's separated parts (vibhinnāṁśa), and thus they are gods of delegated office. Since the Lord's personal potency always stays at His left side, Viṣṇu, who appears from Mahā-Viṣṇu's transcendental potency of unalloyed reality, appears from the left side of His body. Viṣṇu is the Supersoul present within the hearts of all jivas. He is the Personality of Godhead described in the Vedas as being the measure of a thumb; He is the preserver; the karmīs or elevationists worship Him as 'Yajñeśvar Nārāyaṇ' or the Lord of sacrifices, and the yogīs meditate on Him as Paramātmā, desiring to become one with Him.
