## Verse 16

    ahaṅkārātmakaṁ viśvaṁ tasmād etad vyajāyata

### Translation

This world of mundane ego has been born of Śambhu. This is Śambhu's function in relationship with the jīvas.

### Purport

The most original unadulterated Entity is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the All-Truth, free from any conception of separate egoism. The separate masculine organic egoism, that is, the separate symbolic existence that appears in the mundane world, is only an illusory reflection of that pure existence; and represented by the original Śambhu, that existence unites with the distorted representation of Ramā Devī, the māyik or mundane female womb receptacle principle; at that point, Śambhu is represented as the efficient cause only in terms of elementary matter. Again, when in the course of evolution all the universes are manifest the evolved conception of 'Rudra' also appears within the entity of Śambhu who is, as previously explained, born from the brow of Mahā-Viṣṇu; however, the entity of Śambhu is constitutionally egoistic (ahaṅkārātmaka) in all circumstances.

When the endless jīvas—who are sparks of chit or transcendental consciousness emanating from the chit-rays of the Paramātmā—identify themselves in the (pure) ego of exclusive servitors of the Supreme Lord, their relationship with the māyik world no longer endures; they become members of the Vaikuṇṭha World. When they forget that ego and want to become enjoyers of māyā, the egoistic principle of Śambhu enters their existence and gives them the frame of reference of being separate enjoyers.

Thus, Śambhu is the basic truth underlying the egoistic world and the mundane bodily ego of the jīvas.
