## Verse 19

    tattvāni pūrvā-rūḍhāni kāraṇāni parasparam
    samavāyāprayogāch cha vibhinnāni pṛthak pṛthak
    chich-chhaktyā sajjamāno 'tha bhagavān ādi-pūruṣaḥ
    yojayan māyayā devo yoga-nidrām akalpayat

### Translation

Prior to their amalgamation, the five predominant material elements remained in their crude state, separate in different forms. At this point, the process of combining them had not yet ensued. By associating with His divine potency, the primeval Personality of Godhead Mahā-Viṣṇu moved Māyā and united those separate elements by His process of amalgamating or harmonizing them, and executed the creation of the material world. And He remained absorbed in Yoganidrā, which is His consorthood with His divine potency.

### Purport

*mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sacharācharam*: "All moving and nonmoving beings are created by Mother Nature, according to My direction." The purport of this statement in *Śrī Gītā* is as follows. Initially, Māyā, the shadow of the chit potency or divine potency, was inactive; also, the elements of her expanse of ingredients that would form the efficient cause of creation were separate and unamalgamated. By Kṛṣṇa's will, that is, by the agency of the power of Mahā-Viṣṇu, the instrumental and efficient parts of māyā were united, and the effect in the form of the material world was manifest. Despite that, throughout that entire function the Supreme Lord Himself remained united with His divine potency, Yoganidrā. The word 'Yoganidrā' or 'Yogamāyā' should be understood as follows: the nature of the divine potency is illuminating or revelatory, while the nature of Her shadow potency is to manifest the darkness of mundane ignorance. When Kṛṣṇa wishes to illuminate or reveal something in the affairs of the material world of darkness, He executes the task by contacting (yoga) the inert shadow of Māyā with the super-power of His divine potency; and this is the constitution of 'Yogamāyā'.

Herein are two connotations—the Vaikuṇṭha connotation and the worldly, ignorant connotation. Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's plenary expansions (svāṁśa), and those of His separated particles or souls (vibhinnāṁśa-jīvas) that are completely pure, experience the Vaikuṇṭha connotation in that revelation, while the materially conditioned souls feel a mundane, ignorant connotation. A screen veils the spiritual experience in the perceptual faculties of the materially conditioned souls, and this screen goes by the name 'Yoganidrā'; this is also the influence of the potency of the Supreme Lord. This principle will be dealt with more elaborately later.
