## Verse 21

    sa nityo nitya-sambandhaḥ prakṛtiś cha paraiva sā

### Translation

The jīva is eternal, and has an eternal relationship with the Lord for beginningless and endless time; he is of the superior or transcendental energy.

### Purport

As there is a perpetual relationship between the sun and its rays of effulgence, the Supreme Lord and the jīvas similarly have an eternal relationship. The jīvas are atomic particles of His rays of consciousness or divine potency, and thus they are not temporary like any mundane substance. Being particles of the rays of His effulgence, they have inherited a minute proportion of Kṛṣṇa's qualities; therefore, the jīva is an embodiment of perception, the perceiver, egoism, the enjoyer, the thinker and the doer.

The mutual distinction between Kṛṣṇa and the jīva is that Kṛṣṇa is almighty while the jīva is atomic. Their eternal relationship is that the jīva is the eternal servitor of the Supreme Lord, and the Lord is his eternal Master. The jīva is also endowed with ample eligibility in respect to rasa or a divine ecstatic relationship with the Lord. The statement of *Śrī Gītā apareyam itas tv anyāṁ prakṛtiṁ vidhi me parām* informs us that the jīvas are of Kṛṣṇa's superior or transcendental energy; all the qualities of the pure soul are transcendental to the eight material qualities of ego, etc. Therefore, the jīva-potency, despite the minuteness of its magnitude, is constitutionally superior to illusion or māyā.

Another name of the jīva-potency is taṭasthā-śakti, or 'marginal potency', being that he is located on the line of demarcation between the plane of māyā and divinity; due to his minuteness he is prone to be captivated by illusion, but when he remains submissive to Kṛṣṇa, the Master of māyā, he is no longer susceptible to the thralldom of māyā. The conditioned soul who is captivated by māyā since time immemorial must undergo worldly tribulation and sorrow, and be reborn again and again.
