## Verse 26

    atha tene sa suchiraṁ prīṇan govindam avyayam
    śvetadvīpa-patiṁ kṛṣṇaṁ goloka-sthaṁ parātparam
    prakṛtyā guṇa-rūpiṇyā rūpiṇyā paryupāsitam
    sahasra-dala-sampanne koti-kiñjalka-bṛṁhite
    bhūmiś chintāmaṇis tatra karṇikāre mahāsane
    samāsīnaṁ chidānandaṁ jyotīrūpaṁ sanātanam
    śabda-brahmamayaṁ veṇuṁ vādayantaṁ mukhāmbuje
    vilāsinīgaṇavṛtaṁ svaiḥ svair aṁśair abhiṣṭutam

### Translation

Desiring to attain the grace of Govinda, Brahmā took up practising long penance for the pleasure of that Lord of Śvetadvīpa, who is none other than Kṛṣṇa in Goloka. Brahmā's meditation followed in this line: in the land made of wish-fulfilling gems is a thousand-petalled lotus flower that blooms with millions of stamens.

In the centre of the lotus there is a grand throne, upon which the eternal Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the embodiment of the effulgence of divine loving ecstasy, is seated. On His lotus lips the flute of transcendental sound is vibrating sonorously, and His glories are sung by the gopīs of His Pastimes (who surround Him), along with the gopīs' associates who are their respective personal expansions.

As the Supreme worshippable object, He is worshipped (from outside) by prakṛti (Māyā), who is the embodiment of material qualities (gunas).

### Purport

Māyā's nature is materially active (rājasik), and she assumes the forms of Durgā, etc., embodying the qualities of material truth, activation and inertia or sattva, rajaḥ and tamo-guṇa; however, the object of her meditation is completely transcendental, and thus Māyā—the embodiment of the inferior potency—meditates upon Kṛṣṇa with a reverential or worshipful attitude.

Whoever has material hankering in the heart should worship Māyā Devī's object of worship. Even without worshipping Māyā Devī, they will attain success by worshipping Māyā Devī's object of worship. The purport of the *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam* verse *akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā mokṣa-kāma udāradhīḥ, tīvreṇa bhaktiyogena yajeta puruṣaṁ param* is that although the various demigods as expansions of the power of the Supreme Lord are the bestowers of certain rewards, an intelligent person nonetheless worships with resolute devotion the Supreme Godhead, who is replete with the potency to bestow all fruits.

Thus Brahmā meditated upon Māyā Devī's reverentially worshipful truth, Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Enjoyer of His Pastimes in Goloka. Pure devotion that is free from all kinds of fleeting desires is niṣkāma-bḥakti, or devotion devoid of vested interest or selfishness; the devotion of Brahmā and personalities of his general calibre is sakāma or possessing some personal interest. Still, even within such devotion with vested interest there is a selfless stage, and this will be elucidated in the last five verses of this holy book. As long as one has not attained to svarūpa-siddhi or perfection in one's divine self, the method given herein is the convenient way of rendering devotional service for the fallen conditioned soul.
