## Verse 27

    atha veṇu-ninādasya trayī-mūrtimayī gatiḥ
    sphurantī praviveśāśu mukhābjāni svayambhuvaḥ
    gāyatrīṁ gāyatas tasmād adhigatya sarojajaḥ
    saṁskṛtaś chādiguruṇā dvijatām agamat tataḥ

### Translation

Thereafter, the gāyatrī of threefold form, that is, of the form of Oṁkāra (A-u-m), emanated as the beautiful harmonious sequence of the song of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's flute. Entering the ears of Brahmā, it was swiftly manifest within his lotus mouth. Thus Brahmā, who was born of the lotus flower, received gāyatrī as it emanated from the divine flute-song of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and so he was initiated by the Supreme Lord, the original Guru, and elevated to the status of twice-born (dvija).

### Purport

The divine vibration of Kṛṣṇa's flute is a sound of truth, cognizance and ecstasy (sachchidānandamaya), and so the paragon of the Vedas is present within that divine sound. Gāyatrī is a Vedic metre embracing both meditation and prayer in a compact form. Furthermore, Kāma-gāyatrī is topmost since the prayer and meditation contained within it are of the nature of full-fledged divine Pastimes in a manner not found in any other gāyatrī.

Kāma-gāyatrī, which is the gāyatrī taken after the eighteen-syllabled mantra, is *klīṁ kāmadevāya vidmahe puṣpabāṇāya dhīmahi tanno 'naṅgaḥ prachodayāt*. In this gāyatrī is indicated the realization of the līlā or divine Pastimes of Śrī Gopījanavallabha, the beloved of the gopīs, after complete meditation upon Him; and the prayer to attain to (the service of) that transcendental Cupid. In the entire transcendental world there is no higher pursuit for divine love in the shelter of an ecstatic relationship with Him. As soon as that gāyatrī entered into the ears of Lord Brahmā, he attained the purificatory initiation into the status of the twice-born or dvija, and he began to sing the gāyatrī.

Any jīva who has properly received this gāyatrī has attained to divine rebirth. This rebirth is entrance into the transcendental plane, something infinitely superior to the status of the initiation or second birth of the materially conditioned souls that is given according to their nature or lineage in the material world. By divine initiation, the rebirth that is the attainment of divine birth, one reaches the spiritual world—the ultimate glory of the jīva.
