## Verse 30

    veṇuṁ kvaṇantam aravinda-dalāyatākṣaṁ
    barhāvataṁsam asitāmbuda-sundarāṅgam
    kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya-viśeṣa-śobhaṁ
    govindam ādi puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

### Translation

    Always playing the flute,
        His eyes like blooming lotus-petals,
    His head adorned with a peacock feather,
        His beautiful form the hue of a blue cloud;
    with the unique beauty that charms millions of Cupids—
        the Primeval Lord, Govinda, do I adore. 

### Purport

(The unparalleled beauty of Kṛṣṇa, the darling of Goloka, is being described.) The almighty consciousness, Kṛṣṇa, has a spiritual form by nature. It is not that Kṛṣṇa's form can be imagined in comparison to anything beautiful in the material world. What is being described here is what Brahmā is seeing in his divine trance of devotion.

Kṛṣṇa is rapt in playing His flute; the beautiful dancing notes of that flute steal away the hearts of all living beings. As the petal of the lotus flower showers sweetness into our hearts, Kṛṣṇa's eyes, as the revelation of divine vision, expand the unlimited beauty of His moonlike face. His characteristic celestial beauty is set off by the charming ornament of the peacock feather that adorns His head. We feel tranquillity in our hearts when we see a blue rain-cloud—the hue of Kṛṣṇa's body is of a similar divine blackish-blue. Even if we could see or imagine the qualities of this world's Cupid multiplied billions of times, the beauty of Kṛṣṇa is yet more charming.
