## Verse 32

    aṅgāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛttimanti
    paśyanti pānti kalayanti chiraṁ jaganti
    ānanda-chinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya
    govindam ādi puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

### Translation

    I worship that Primeval Lord Govinda, whose form
        is all-ecstatic, all-conscious and all-truth,
    and thus, full of the most dazzling splendour;
        every part of that transcendental form
    possesses the functions of all His senses,
        as He eternally sees, maintains and regulates
    infinite universes, both spiritual and mundane.

### Purport

Due to their paucity of a taste for spirituality, a grave doubt wells up in the minds of persons bound by mundane knowledge. Hearing the descriptions of Kṛṣṇa's Pastimes (līlā) they conjecture that the Kṛṣṇa conception has been conjured up by the fertile brains of some scholarly scribes inspired by mundane experiences. To dispel such a venomous doubt, in this and the following three verses Brahmā distinguishes between material and spiritual elements in a scientific manner, and he attempts to give an understanding of Kṛṣṇa-līlā as perceived in the undivided attention of pure consciousness (śuddha-samādhi).

Brahmā's aim is to establish that the form of Kṛṣṇa is the entity of eternity, cognizance and bliss, while all mundane phenomena are of the nature of the darkness of ignorance. Beyond this specific distinction between the two, the basic principle to be realized is that the transcendental is the most fundamental or original—as the Original Person, differentiation and variegatedness are ever-present in *Him*. Thereby, Kṛṣṇa's divine Abode, divine Form, divine Name, Quality and Pastimes are established as tangible reality.

Those Pastimes are to be tasted only by a person who is endowed with pure theistic intellect and full freedom from any relationship with mundanity. The holy abode, the place of Pastimes made of divine wish-yielding gems manifest by divine potency, and Kṛṣṇa's form—all are transcendental.

As the māyā potency is a shadow of the chit or transcendental potency, similarly, the variegatedness fashioned by māyā is also a contemptible reflection or shadow of the variegatedness in the transcendental plane. It is for this reason that some semblance of the transcendental variegatedness may be apparent in the mundane world. Despite that semblance, there is a gulf of distinction between the two. The loathsomeness of the mundane is its flaw, but there is variegatedness in the transcendental reality devoid of such a blemish.

There is no mutual distinction between Kṛṣṇa and His body. The materially conditioned soul and his body are separate elements; in the intrinsic transcendental form there is not the estrangement of body and embodied, limbs and body, nature and its possessor—this difference is to be found only in the materially conditioned soul. Although Kṛṣṇa is the owner of His limbs, each of His limbs are also Kṛṣṇa in full; all His transcendental faculties are present in each of His limbs. Therefore, He is the indivisible, complete transcendental truth.

The spirit soul or jīvātmā, and Kṛṣṇa—both are spiritual and thus of the same category. Yet the difference between the two is that all the transcendental qualities are present in the individual soul in an atomic proportion, and present in Kṛṣṇa infinitely. When the jīva attains to his divine form, those qualities become openly revealed in atomic form. By the grace of Kṛṣṇa, when the power of the transcendental hlādinī or ecstasy potency makes its descent in the heart of the soul, he attains to a perfection resembling the Infinite; nonetheless, Kṛṣṇa retains certain unique qualities that make Him worshippable by all. Those fourfold qualities are not manifest in the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha or the Puruṣ-avatār expansions; they are also absent in the gods headed by Girīśa (Lord Śiva), not to mention the jīva.
