## Verse 33

    advaitam achyutam anādim anantarūpam
    ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ navayauvanañ cha
    vedeṣu durlabham adurlabham ātmabhaktau
    govindam ādi puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

### Translation

    I adore that primeval Lord Govinda,
        who is unapproachable by even the Vedas,
    yet attainable by the soul's devotion;
        He is—One without a second, the infallible,
    beginningless and endless; He is the beginning;
        and despite being the oldest Personality
    He is the beautiful eternally adolescent male.

### Purport

Advaita means the One without a second indivisible Truth; although the effulgence of the infinite Brahman emanates from Him, and although He expands Himself in His portion of Paramātmā, He is nonetheless indivisible. Achyuta means that although He expands Himself as myriads of Avatārs that are His plenary portions, and although infinite jīvas emanate from Him as separated particles, He nonetheless remains as the Supreme Whole.

Despite manifesting His Pastimes beginning with His birth, He is nonetheless anādi, beginningless. Despite withdrawing His manifest Pastimes, He is ananta, endless. Despite being beginningless, He takes birth (ādya) in His Advent Pastimes. And although He is in fact the eternal Personality, He is nonetheless filled with eternally fresh youthfulness.

The underlying purport here is that although He possesses many types of contradictory qualities, they are all harmonised in every respect by His inconceivable potency. Such is the divine nature, or in other words, the clear distinction of the divine from the mundane.

His beautiful triple-curved feature, holding the flute, is forever imbued with pristine youthfulness—He is completely transcendental to the unwholesomeness of the limited time and space that is present in the mundane sphere. He is ever refulgent in His divine abode in the pure present tense devoid of past and future. The estrangement between an object and its qualities that is found in the fluctuating mundane plane is completely absent in the divine realm. Therefore, all the qualities that seem to be contradictory in the estimation of a conception crippled by mundane time and space are ever harmoniously and charmingly resplendent in the spiritual world.

How can the jīva experience such a sublime existence? The mundane perceptual faculty of the jīva is always contaminated by the imperfection of time and space, and so he is helpless to abandon his mundane conception. If the perceptual faculty does not approach transcendental realization, what faculty can ever approach it?

In reply, Brahmā says that the divine realm is unapproachable by the Vedas; the basis of the Vedas is sound, and sound is a product of material nature. Thus, the Vedas cannot directly show us the supra-mundane Goloka. Only when the Vedas are infused with the divine potency can they somewhat indicate that realm. Still, every jīva can receive the revelation of Goloka when that same divine potency influences them with divine cognition (saṁvit) as a result of the concentrated essence of the potency of divine ecstasy (hlādinī-śakti-sāra) (which is the awakening of the current of devotion in the soul).

The ecstatic current of devotion is unlimited; it is the substance of pure divine consciousness. Such perception is the heart of devotion: without asserting itself separately as any form of 'knowledge', it is the direct symptom of exclusive devotion; and it is this that reveals the realm of Goloka.
