## Verse 34

    panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara-saṁpragamyo
    vāyor athāpi manaso munipuṅgavānām
    so 'py asti yat-prapadasīmny avichintya-tattve
    govindam ādi puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

### Translation

    The yogīs tread the path
        of strictly controlling the life-breath,
    or the greatest sages tread the path
        of sharpening their perceptions
    by assiduous rejection of the non-real,
        in quest of the nondifferentiative Brahman,
    they all aspire to reach that Supramundane Truth
        beyond the worldly intellect; and after trying
    for billions of years, they may reach
        only the boundary of His Lotus Feet—
    it is that Primeval Lord Govinda who I do worship.

### Purport

The nectarine relish of pure devotion is—the attainment of the Lotus Feet of Govinda. The 'oneness with God' attained by the aṣṭāṅga-yogīs after billions of years of meditation, and the self-dissolution in the nondifferentiative Brahman in the form of contemplation on the indifferent that the great monist sages finally attain after sitting for a similar period and rejecting māyik elements one by one, saying, 'This is not it, this is not it' in their philosophizing on the distinction between matter and spirit—all these attempts are only in the region of the outer area surrounding Kṛṣṇa's Lotus Feet—not Kṛṣṇa's Lotus Feet proper.

The underlying point is that *kaivalya* and *brahmalaya*—becoming one with the Absolute and ultimate dissolution in the Absolute—are situated at a region midway between the mundane plane and the divine realm, since without crossing beyond these two states, the variegatedness of the divine realm is indiscernible. All such positions are nothing more than the absence of the sorrow in mundane relativity by a process of elimination, but not happiness. Even if any measure of 'happiness' is professed in that state of sorrowlessness, it will be most meagre and insignificant. Merely to dissipate the mundane situation is not enough; actual attainment is alone the establishment of the jīva's supramundane situation. This can be attained only by the grace of divinity personified in devotion, and never by the path of tasteless and tortuous mental speculation.
