## Verse 35

    eko 'py asau rachyituṁ jagadaṇḍa-koṭiṁ
    yach-chhaktir asti jagadaṇḍachayā yad antaḥ
    aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇuchayāntara-sthaṁ
    govindam ādi puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

### Translation

    He—the One Truth, both potency and potent—
        His potency in creating billions of universes
    is not separate from Him;
        every universe is within Him, yet simultaneously
    He is situated within every atom in complete form.
        Such is the Primeval Lord Govinda who I do worship.

### Purport

Clearly distinct from the mundane conception, there is the superior element of transcendence or chit present within Kṛṣṇa. By His sweet will, He creates infinite universes with His inconceivable potency. The entire world is a transformation of His potency. Still, His location is beyond the jurisdiction of this world; all worlds, both spiritual and mundane, are situated within Him, and at the same time He, in His full form, is situated within not only every universe but within every atom of every universe.

Omnipresence is only a localized aspect of His Almighty Majesty. Although He is all-pervading, He nonetheless exists always and everywhere in His full-fledged form of the most charming feature in *medium (humanlike) proportions*; and this is His supramundane, transcendental Lordship. By this consideration, the full-fledged theistic axiom of simultaneous inconceivable oneness and distinction is favoured, and the contaminating viewpoint of the māyāvād and allied impersonalistic doctrines is summarily disproved.
