## Verse 36

    yad-bhāva-bhāvita-dhiyo manujās tathaiva
    saṁprāpya rūpa-mahimāsana-yāna-bhūṣāḥ
    sūktair yam eva nigama-prathitaiḥ stuvanti
    govindam ādi puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

### Translation

    I worship the Primeval Lord Govinda
        for whom the hearts of mankind melt in love.
    Those persons attain the glory of their beauty,
        their seats, conveyances and ornaments;
    and they sing His Glories by the mantra hymns
        of the Vedas.

### Purport

In the philosophy of rasa or the pure heart's disposition, the devotional conception may be of five types: śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and śṛṅgāra (peacefulness, servitude, fraternity, parenthood and consorthood). Adopting their particular disposition, the devotees render their delegated service to the appropriate form of Kṛṣṇa, and ultimately attain to their befitting destination. According to their particular rasa, they attain to their divine form, their befitting glories, the appropriate seat in the form of the holy place of their service or worship, the appropriate conveyance and the ornaments of divine qualities that enhance their personal beauty.

Those who are eligible for śānta-rasa attain the places of peace that are the abodes of Brahman and Paramātmā; those who are eligible for dāsya-rasa attain the majestic Vaikuṇṭha Dhām; and those eligible for pure sakhya-, vātsalya- and madhura-rasa reach Goloka Dhām, above Vaikuṇṭha. In their particular destination, each gains the ingredients and paraphernalia appropriate to their rasa and sing the holy hymns that are directed by the Vedas. In certain passages, the Vedas take refuge in the divine potency and describe (reveal) the Holy Pastimes of the Supreme Lord; correspondingly, the fully liberated pure devotees go on singing the glories of His Pastimes, serving Him by the various established spiritual methods (kīrtan, etc.), taking refuge in the divine potency.
