## Verse 37

    ānanda-chinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis-
    tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatyā kalābhiḥ
    goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūto
    govindam ādi puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

### Translation

    He eternally resides in His holy abode of Goloka
        with His transcendental second nature,
    the Own Self of His ecstasy potency
        replete with the sixty-four sublime arts—Śrī Rādhā
    and Her various personal plenary expansions,
        Her lady companions, whose hearts are filled
    with the supreme rasa, the joy of divine love;
        that primeval Lord Govinda—
    the life and soul of His beloved—do I adore.

### Purport

The Absolute, despite being One as potency and potent, eternally presides by His ecstasy potency in two separate forms—Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Inconceivable amorous consorthood is ever-present in both that ecstasy (hlādinī) and divinity (Kṛṣṇa). Vibhāva, or the cause of the experience of that rasa or ecstatic principle, is divided into two: ālambana or the basis, and uddīpana or the stimulation. Of the two, ālambana is further divided into two: āśraya, or the repository of love, and viṣaya, or the object to whom that love is directed. The āśraya is Śrī Rādhikā Herself, along with Her various personal plenary expansions; and the viṣaya is Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself. Kṛṣṇa is Govinda, the Lord of Goloka. The repository of deep love in that rasa is embodied in the gopīs. It is with Them that Kṛṣṇa enjoys His eternal Pastimes in Goloka.

The expression *nija-rūpatayā* indicates 'along with all the plenary expansions, charms, or arts manifest by the current of the ecstasy potency; those arts are sixty-four in number: *nṛtyam, gītam, vādyam, nāṭyam, ālekhyam, viśeṣaka-chchhedyam, taṇḍula-kusuma-vaṇi-vikārāḥ, puṣpāstaraṇam, daśana-vasanāṅga-rāgāḥ, maṇi-bhūmikā-karman, śayā-rachanam, udaka-vādyam, udaka-ghātaḥ, chitrayogāḥ, mālya-granthana-vikalpāḥ, śekharāpīḍa-yojanam, nepathya-yogāḥ, karṇa-patra-bhaṅgāḥ, gandha-yuktiḥ, bhūṣaṇa-yojanam, aindra-jālam, kauchumāra-yogāḥ, hasta-lāghavam, chitra-śākāpūpa-bhakṣya-vikāra-kriyāḥ, pānaka-rasa-rāgāsava-yojanam, sūchī-vāpa-karmman, sūtra-krīḍā, prahelikā, prati-mālā, durvachaka-yogāḥ, pustaka-vachanam, nāṭikākhāyikā-darśanam, kāvya-samasyā-pūraṇam, paṭṭikā-vetra-bāṇa-vikalpāḥ, tarku-karman, takṣaṇam, vāstu-vidyā, raupya-ratna-parīkṣā, dhātuvādaḥ, maṇi-rāga-jñānam, ākara-jñānam, vrkṣāyurveda-yogāḥ, meṣa-kukkuta-śāvaka-yuddha-vidhi, śuka-śārikā-pralāpanam, utsādanam, keśa-mārjana-kauśalam, akṣara-muṣṭikā-kathanam, mlechchhita-kutarka-vikalpāḥ, deśa-bhāṣā-jñānam, puṣpa-śakaṭikā-nimitta-jñānam, yantra-mātṛkā, dhāraṇa-mātṛkā, sam-pāṭyam, mānasī-kāvya-kriyāḥ, kriyā-vikalpāḥ, chhalitaka-yogāḥ, abhidhāna-koṣa-chchhanda-jñānam, vastra-gopanam, dyūta-viśeṣam, ākarṣa-krīḍā, bālaka-krīḍānakam, vai-nāyikī-vidyā, vaijayikī-vidyā and vaitālikī-vidyā*.

All these teachings are divinely personified and eternally manifest as the ingredients of rasa in Goloka; and in the world, by the divine potency Yogamāyā, they have been auspiciously manifest in the Pastimes of Vraja. For this reason, Śrī Rūpa has stated, *sadānantaiḥ prakāśaiḥ svair līlābhiś cha sa dīvyati, tatraikena prakāśena kadāchij jagad antare, sahaiva svaparivārair janmādi kurute hariḥ; Kṛṣṇa-bhāvānusāreṇa līlākḥyā śaktir eva sā, teṣāṁ parikarāṇāñ cha taṁ taṁ bhāvaṁ vibhāvayet; prapañcha-gocharatvena sā līlā prakaṭa smṛtā, anyās tv aprakaṭā bhānti tāḍrśyas tad agocharāḥ; tatra prakaṭa-līlāyām eva syātāṁ gamāgamau, gokule mathurāyāñ cha dvārakāyāñ cha śārṅginaḥ; yās tatra tatrāprakaṭās tatra tatraiva santi tāḥ*. This means that in Goloka, Kṛṣṇa is ever-beautifully resplendent with His infinite Pastimes; sometimes there are variations in the manifestation of those Pastimes in the mundane world. The Supreme Lord Śrī Hari reveals the Pastimes of His advent, etc., in His family. According to His sweet will, the līlā potency also infuses the hearts of His personal associates with the devotional dispositions appropriate to their service. All the Pastimes that are visible to the world are manifest Pastimes, while those Pastimes that are invisible to the world are unmanifest by remaining in Goloka. In His manifest Pastimes, Kṛṣṇa frequents Gokula, Mathurā and Dvārakā. All the Pastimes that are not manifest in those three places remain manifest in the divine abode, the original location of Vṛndāvan.

All these conclusions inform us that intrinsically there is no distinction between the manifest and unmanifest Pastimes. In his commentary of this śloka and in his commentary of *Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi* and in *Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha* and other exalted works our most revered Āchārya Śrī Jīva Goswāmī has stated that Kṛṣṇa's manifest Pastimes are conducted by Yogamāyā; because those Pastimes are associated with material nature, some māyik or worldly traits are apparent in them, which can in no way be present in the intrinsic transcendental Pastimes. For example, the slaying of demons, paramour relationships, birth, and so on. The gopīs are of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's personal potency, so they are His own without exception; how can they be considered to be the wives of others? So the paramour affairs of the Pastimes manifest on Earth, in which they are considered to be others' wives, are only a mundane inflection of the transcendental reality.

When we can have some insight into the deep purport of the line of thought in these explanations of Śrī Jīva Goswāmipāda, no room for any doubt about the truth can remain in our hearts. Śrī Jīva Goswāmi-pāda is our tattva-āchārya, Divine Guide in transcendental truth—his representation is always strictly in conformity with the line of Śrī Rūpa-Sanātan; besides, in his internal divine identity, he is a particular mañjarī. So all transcendental truths are fully known to him. Without understanding the gist of his line of thought, some persons have speculated and concocted their own interpretation of his words, ushering in a tirade of fruitless controversy.

According to Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātan, unmanifest and manifest Pastimes are identical, with the only exception that the former is revealed beyond the material world while the latter is revealed within it. In the revelation beyond this world, there is absolute purity in regard to the seer and the seen. When by great fortune one receives the grace of Kṛṣṇa, and is thus able to completely sever his relationship with the mundane and enter into the transcendental world—and further, if he attains to the perfection of tasting the variegatedness of spiritual rasa during his practising spiritual life—such a person will be able to see and taste the complete divine Pastimes of Goloka. Such a blessed recipient is rare; and one who despite being present in the material world has through his perfection in devotion gained the grace of Kṛṣṇa and thus attained to experience of the spiritual rasa will be able to see those Goloka Pastimes in the Gokula Pastimes manifest in this earthly plane.

There is a definite comparative distinction between these two classes of devotees; until the attainment of *vastu-siddhi*,[^1] the ability to have the darśana (vision) of Goloka Pastimes is always deterred by some mundane obstruction. Again, it must be admitted that there are different gradations of the darśana of Goloka in proportion to one's comparative progress in svarūpa-siddhi, which determines one's stage of svarūpa-darśana or vision of the Reality.

Those who are very tightly bound by the chains of illusion have no eyes of devotion; of such persons, some see everything in the variegatedness of the illusory world, and others, taking shelter of non-theistic knowledge, are aspirants of suicidal ultimate dissolution. Even if they are able to see the manifest Pastimes of the Lord, nothing more than mundane connotations devoid of any relationship with the unmanifest Pastimes appear in their minds. So in this way, the darśana of Goloka is attainable according to one's eligibility.

The fine point here is that as Goloka is pure truth, Gokula is similarly pure and completely devoid of impurity; however, by the divine chit potency Yogamāyā, Gokula is manifest in the mundane world. In either the manifest or unmanifest affairs of that plane there is not the slightest trace of contamination, unwholesomeness or imperfection as found in the limited world; only according to the varying eligibility of the jīvas do they appear with certain variations. Contamination, unwholesomeness, superfluity, misunderstanding, ignorance, impurity, falsity, lowliness, grossness—all these are present in the mundane vision of the viewing jīvas' eyes, intellect, mind and ego. They are not inherent in the observable object. The more one is free from those particular stigmas, the more he will be capable of having the vision of the transcendental truth.

The Truth that is revealed in the śāstra or holy scriptures is completely devoid of contamination; the purity or impurity of the realizations of the different viewers are dependent on their individual qualifications. All the abovementioned sixty-four arts exist in Goloka in their original pure form, devoid of any trace of mundanity. The qualification of purity of the deliberator on these matters will determine whether he sees any connotation of unwholesomeness, lowliness or grossness in them.

According to Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātan, whatever types of Pastimes are manifest in Gokula, all are in Goloka intrinsically and devoid of any scent of mundanity. So by that consideration, parakīya-bhāva or the mode of paramour relationship must certainly also be in Goloka, in a kind of inconceivably pure posing. Everything that is manifest by Yogamāyā is pure; when paramourship is arranged by Yogamāyā, its roots in pure Absolute Reality are indicated.

Śrī Rūpa has written: *pūrvokta-dhīrodāttādi-chaturbhedasya tasya tu, patiś chopapatiś cheti prabhedāv iha viśrutau; tatra patiḥ sa kanyāyāḥ yaḥ pāṇigrāhako bhavet, rāgeṇol-laṅghayan dharmaṁ parakīyābalārthinā, tadīya-prema-sarvasvaṁ budhair upapatiḥ smṛtah; laghutvam atra yat proktaṁ tat tu prākṛta-nāyake, na kṛṣṇe rasa-niryāsa-svādārtham avatāriṇi. Tatra nāyikā-bheda-vichāraḥ,—nāsau nāṭye-rase mukhye yat parodhā nigadyate, tat tu syāt prākṛta-kṣudra-nāyikādy anusārataḥ*. Śrī Jīva has deeply considered all these ślokas and substantiated that as the Pastimes of birth, etc., are Pastimes of divine delusion (vibhrama-vilās) attributed to Yogamāyā, the same is applicable in the case of the paramour conception. *Tathāpi patiḥ pura-vanitānāṁ dvitīyo vraja-vanitānāṁ*—by this statement he has revealed his deep purport. In the conclusions established by Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātan, the Pastimes of Divine Delusion arranged by Yogamāyā have also been admitted. Yet when Śrī Jīva Goswāmī has determined Goloka and Gokula to be identical, it cannot but be admitted that the basis of the Gokula Pastimes is the fundamental transcendental reality.

One who accepts the hand of a maiden according to the injunction of marriage is a husband, while one who, thinking his love to be all-in-all, crosses the injunctions of religious duty in order to gain another's wife, is a paramour. In Goloka there is no religious obligation binding anyone to the injunction of marriage, so no husbandhood of that order is to be found there either; on the other hand, since there can be no marriage with others for the gopīs, who are in that way constitutionally Kṛṣṇa's own, there is no question of them becoming lady paramours. There, the concepts of wedded and paramour (svakīya-pārakīya) cannot exist independently of one another. In Kṛṣṇa's Pastimes manifest in the material world, the binding religious code of marriage is present; Kṛṣṇa is transcendental to that religious duty. So the circle of divine amorous affairs is thus an arrangement of Yogamāyā. Crossing that religious obligation, Kṛṣṇa enjoyed the taste of paramourship. These Pastimes of 'overstepping morality' manifest by Yogamāyā are seen in the world by eyes enveloped in mundanity; in actuality there is no trace of such pettiness or superficiality in the Pastimes of Kṛṣṇa at all.

*Pārakīya-rasa* is the essence of all rasas; to deny its existence in Goloka would be tantamount to sacrilege. The superexcellent, transcendental ecstatic experience cannot be absent in the superexcellent Goloka. Kṛṣṇa, the origin of all Avatārs, tastes that in a certain way in Goloka, and He tastes that in a certain way in Gokula. So despite the immoral connotation seen in paramourship by the mundane eye, paramourship nonetheless has its peculiar wholesome existence in Goloka also. From the scriptural statements *"ātmārāmo py arīramat," "ātmany avaruddha-saurataḥ," "reme vrajasundarībhir yathārbhakaḥ svapratibimba-vibhramaḥ"* etc., it is evident that self-satisfaction is Kṛṣṇa's personal nature.

In the majestic area of the transcendental world, He manifests His personal potency as Lakṣmī and consorts with Her in the mood of wedlock. Since this mood of ownership in wedlock (svakīyā-buddhi) predominates there, the scope of rasa naturally and charmingly goes up to servitude or dāsya-rasa. But in Goloka, Kṛṣṇa expands His personal potency into millions of gopīs and He consorts with them, forgetting all ownership. The extreme rarity of the paramour relationship is absent in the sentiment of marriage, so naturally the gopīs since time immemorial are endowed with the innate sentiment of being "others' wives" or female paramours; and Kṛṣṇa Himself also reciprocates by accepting the sentiment of paramourship, and with the help of His beloved companion the flute, He enjoys līlā or Pastimes such as the rāsa Dance.

Goloka is eternally perfect—the seat of transcendental ecstasy or rasa—transcendental to any mundane inflection; so in that realm, the divine current of the sentiment of paramourship flows in its perfection. Further, the way of majesty (aiśvarya) is such that the parental sentiment (vātsalya-rasa) directed to the origin of all incarnations is also absent in Vaikuṇṭha. Yet in the paramount plane of divine consorthood—the *parama-mādhurya-maya* Goloka—there is only the original *mood* of that sentiment. There, Nanda and Yaśodā are personally present, but there is no direct occurrence of Kṛṣṇa's birth; without the function of giving birth to a son, the egos of fatherhood and motherhood of Nanda and Yaśodā are their hearts' sentiments only. *Jayati jana-nivāso Devakī-janmavādaḥ*. For the perfection of the rasa that sentiment is eternal. Similarly in śṛṅgāra-rasa also, since only the *sentiment* of male and female paramourship is eternal, absolutely no stigma or any type of scriptural violation can be present there. When the Goloka principle is manifest in Vraja, the only difference is that these two sentiments *appear* to possess some grossness in the mundane vision. The parental sentiment of Nanda and Yaśodā appears in a more 'earthly' way, in the form of the Pastimes of Kṛṣṇa's birth, etc. The consorthood sentiment of the gopīs as "others' wives" appears in a more 'earthly' way in the form of their marriages to Abhimanyu and Govarddhana, etc.

In reality, in neither Goloka nor Gokula is there any separate existence of lordship or husbandhood over the Gopīs. Therefore the scriptures have said, *na jātu vraja-devīnāṁ patibhiḥ saha saṅgamah*: there is never sexual union of the Gopīs with their husbands. So the *Rasatattvāchārya*, the Divine Guide in the science of transcendental rasa, Śrī Rūpa, has written that the hero of *ujjvala-rasa* (consorthood) is of two types—*patiś chopapatiś cheti pra-bhedāv iha viśrutau, iti*—husband and paramour.

In his commentary Śrī Jīva has admitted the husbandhood of Kṛṣṇa in Dvārakā and Vaikuṇṭha, etc., and the eternal paramourship of Kṛṣṇa in Goloka and Gokula, in the statement *patiḥ pura-vanitānāṁ dvitīyo vraja-vanitānāṁ*. In the Lord of Goloka, Golokanātha, and in the Lord of Gokula, Gokulanātha, the expression of paramourship is found in its complete form. Kṛṣṇa's overstepping (laṅghana) of His Own nature (dharma) of self-satisfaction (ātmārāmatva) is the only cause of His apparently overstepping religious duty (dharma-laṅghana) through His passion for paramourship. That paramourship is the root cause of the gopis' corresponding eternal sentiment of their being 'wives of others'.

Although in reality there are no husbands of separate interest for the gopīs at all, their sentiment causes them to have the nature of others' wives. Thus *rāgeṇollaṅghayan dharmaṁ*—'love above law', and all such symptoms are eternally present in the divine plane of love. In Vraja, a general outline of this can be appreciated to some degree by the worldly eye.

Thus in Goloka the rasas of wedlock and paramourship are inconceivably one and distinct—neither their distinction nor their similarity can be admitted. The essence of paramourship sentiment denies ownership and the essence of ownership denies paramourship in the Lord's consorthood with His personal divine potency, yet the denial of paramourship sentiment in His consorthood with His personal divine potency means consorthood beyond the religious injunction of marriage. Accommodating the variegatedness of both concepts, Their consummation in the ultimate singular rasa or divine ecstatic relationship is ever gloriously refulgent there in Goloka. Indeed, the same is true for Gokula; some other inference is fostered by the mundane observers only. In Govinda, the Hero of the Pastimes of Goloka, husbandhood and paramourship beyond both religiosity or irreligiosity preside in their pristine glory; and although the same is true for the Hero of Gokula, a varied connotation appears by the agency of Yogamāyā.

If it is suggested that whatever Yogamāyā manifests is divine truth created by divine potency so even the idea of adultery is to be taken as an actual reality, it must be replied that in the experience of the spiritual rasa, the idea of such a sentiment can exist, and that too without any flaw since it is not without foundation; it is based on the presence of a correspondingly perfect sentiment in its origin of fundamental truth; but the ugly connotation of the mundane is a contaminated conception that can never stand in the plane of pure existence.

Actually, Śrī Jīva Goswāmī has presented the correct conclusion, while the opposing conclusion also carries the truth in an inconceivable way; to engage in fruitless empirical wrangling for the case of wedlock or paramourship is a baseless endeavour of so much verbiage. One who, with an unprejudiced view, thoroughly examines the commentaries of Śrī Jīva Goswāmī and all the opposing commentaries cannot but come to the end of all arguments born of doubts.

Whatever is spoken by the pure Vaiṣṇava is truth, utterly free from any form of prejudice, yet there is the element of mystery in their controversies. Those whose intellects are possessed by illusion and mundanity, in their paucity of pure Vaiṣṇava qualification are unable to grasp the significance of the mysterious affectionate controversies among the pure Vaiṣṇavas, and they thus ascribe to them the defect of wrangling and party spirit.

*Gopīnāṁ tat-patīnāñ cha*. The conclusion given by Śrī Sanātan Goswāmī in his commentary *Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī* on this śloka from the five chapters of *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam* dealing with the rāsa-līlā has been unhesitatingly embraced with the utmost reverence by the pure devotee Śrī Viśvanātha Chakravartī Ṭhākur.

When we attempt to deliberate on the matters of transcendental Pastimes of places such as Goloka, we would be best advised to bear in mind a point that has been graciously taught by Śrīman Mahāprabhu and the Goswāmīs: the reality of the Supreme Absolute Truth is always variegated with divine attributes; that is, it is always transcendental to mundane attributes, and never unvariegated or nondifferentiative. The beauty of rasa in relationship with the Supreme Lord is manifest by its variegatedness, with four basic attributes known as vibhāva (subject and object), anubhāva (illuminating symptoms), sāttvika (particular emotional symptoms) and vyabhichārī (particular secondary transitory symptoms); such rasa full of variegatedness is ever-present in Goloka and Vaikuṇṭha.

By the power of Yogamāyā the rasa of Goloka is manifest in this world for the benefit of the devotees, appearing as the rasa of Vraja; whatever is seen in that Gokula-rasa must also appear graphically in Goloka-rasa. So different varieties in the nature of the male and female paramour, variegatedness in rasa of those identities, the soil, water, rivers, mountains, gateways, groves, cows, etc.—all these ingredients of Gokula are correspondingly and intrinsically present in Goloka; only the mundane connotation ascribed to this realm by persons of mundane conception is absent. According to the eligibility of the devotee, there are distinctly varied revelations in the variegated Pastimes of Vraja. To form a single criterion to determine which portions of those revelations may be illusory and which may be pure is difficult. The more the eyes of devotion are anointed or adorned with the salve of love, the more the pure will gradually reveal itself. So there is no necessity of argument; argument does not enhance anyone's eligibility—the depth of the plane of Goloka is of inconceivable subtleness. To try to conceive the inconceivable, like the futile pounding of empty grain-husk, can only come to nought. Therefore one must desist from the attempt of knowledge and attain realization by the devotional pursuit. Any pursuit that ultimately leads one to a nondifferentiative impression must be shunned in all respects.

The pure rasa of paramourship free from all mundane conception is extremely rarely attained. It is described in the Pastimes of Gokula, and it must be embraced and served by the devotees following the line of divine love, the *Rāgānuga-bhaktas*, and upon perfection they will attain to the higher fundamental truth of Reality the Beautiful. That devotional service which aims at paramourship, but is performed by persons of mundane attitude, is repeatedly condemned as illicit, perverse anti-religion. Pained at seeing such hypocrisy rampant, our tattva-āchārya, Śrī Jīva, was most eager to deliver his exposition. To embrace the essence of his delivery is in itself the quality of pure Vaiṣṇavism. It is an offence, aparādh, to disrespect the Āchārya by attempting to establish an opposing doctrine.

[^1]: *vastu-siddhi* and *svarūpa-siddhi*—vide purport of verse 2.
