## Verse 38

    premāñjana-chchhurita-bhakti-vilochanena
    santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti
    yaṁ śyāmasundaram achintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ
    govindam ādi puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

### Translation

    The sādhus, their eyes tinted with the unguent of love,
        see within their hearts
    that Śyāmasundar Kṛṣṇa of inconceivable qualities;
        that Primeval Lord, Govinda, do I adore.

### Purport

The form of Śyāmasundar is Kṛṣṇa's inconceivable simultaneously personal and impersonal paradoxical form. The sādhus or pure devotees see Him within their own hearts, in their trance of devotion (bhakti-samādhi). The Śyāma form is not of the śyāma or black colour of this world, but it is the colour of the transcendental variegatedness that bestows eternal joy. It cannot be seen with mundane eyes. *Bhaktiyogena manasi samyak praṇihite 'male, apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇam* etc.: if we study the nature of the pure samādhi of Vyāsadev, we will appreciate that the intrinsic form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the whole Personality of Godhead, and He appears seated in the inner region of His devotee's heart of devotional trance.

At the time of His appearance in Vraja, everyone, both devotees and non-devotees, saw Him directly; but only the devotees adored Him—Kṛṣṇa of the holy place of Vraja—as the priceless jewel of their hearts.

Now also, even without visually seeing him in that way, the devotees see Kṛṣṇa in Vraja Dhām within their hearts saturated with devotion. The jīva's eyes of devotion are the eyes of his pure spiritual self. The pure vision of Kṛṣṇa is attainable in proportion to the degree that those eyes are developed by the cultivation of devotion. When devotion in practice (sādhana-bhakti) reaches the budding stage of love (bhāva), by the power of Kṛṣṇa's grace the unguent that is love is applied to the eyes of that developed devotee; then he can have the direct darśan of Kṛṣṇa. The phrase 'within their hearts' means that Kṛṣṇa is seen in proportion to the degree that His devotee's heart is purified by devotional qualification.

The essential point is that the triple-curved form of Śyāmasundar, the Supreme Dancer who plays the flute, is not imaginary; it is seen by the eye of unalloyed consciousness.
