## Verse 43

    goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni tale cha tasya
    devī maheśa-hari-dhāmasu teṣu teṣu
    te te prabhāva-nichayā vihitāś cha yena
    govindam ādi puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

### Translation

    First there is Devī Dhām, then Maheś Dhām,
        and above Maheś Dhām is Hari Dhām;
    and above all is His own home, Goloka.
        He who has ordained the appropriate powers
    pertaining to each and every one of those abodes—
        that Primeval Lord, Govinda, do I worship.

### Purport

Goloka Dhām is the abode situated above all others. Seeing that above, from the point of *his* home ground, Brahmā is describing all the successive realms. First is Devī Dhām, which refers to the material world; in this realm the fourteen planes headed by Satyaloka are situated. Above this is Śiva Dhām; in that plane, a portion known as Mahākāl Dhām is pervaded with darkness. On the other side of that portion of darkness is the immensely effulgent plane of Sadāśivaloka. Above that is Hari Dhām or the spiritual world, Vaikuṇṭhaloka.

The power of Devī Dhām as Māyā's majesty, and the power of Śiva Dhām as time and the aggregate of material elements, is present in those planes as the power of the hazy aspect (ābhāsa) of the Lord's plenary expansion (svāṁśa), reflected as separated particles (vibhinnāṁśa). But the power of Hari Dhām is its transcendental majesty, and the power of all-sweetness and charm of Goloka is the mainstay of all majesties. All these powers in each of these abodes are ordained by the direct and indirect might of Govinda.
