## Verse 44

    sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā
    chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni vibhartti durgā
    ichchhānurūpam api yasya cha cheṣṭate sā
    govindam ādi puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

### Translation

    The Intrinsic or Divine Potency's shadow is personified
        as the Māyā potency who accomplishes
    creation, sustenance and dissolution,
        and who is worshipped in the world as 'Durgā';
    by He whose wish she acts—
        that Primeval Lord, Govinda, do I worship.

### Purport

(The presiding deity of the aforementioned Devī Dhām is being described.) This world, where Brahmā is situated and singing the Glories of the Lord of Goloka, is the world of fourteen planes, 'Devī Dhām', of which the presiding goddess is 'Durgā'. She has ten arms, representing the ten karmas or purificatory rites. Her prowess as a heroine is indicated by her riding on a lion. She is the subduer of vice, represented in her punishing Mahiṣāsura, the buffalo-demon. She is the mother of Kārttika and Gaṇeśa, indicating her to be the possessor of beauty and success, represented in her sons. She is positioned midway between the aspects of Lakṣmī and Saraswatī who are the companions of worldly opulence and knowledge. For suppressing vice, she is the bearer of twenty weapons representing the manifold Vedic religious duties. She is adorned with, that is, she holds the snake, representing the beauty of time, the vanquisher. Durgā possesses all these features.

Durgā also possesses a *durga*. Durga means 'prison'. When the jīvas, who have their origin in the marginal potency, become averse to Kṛṣṇa, the prison in which they are interned is Durgā's durga. The instrument of punishment in that prison is the wheel of karma; her duty by the wish of Govinda is to fulfill the task of reforming the averse jīvas by such corrective measures, a task that she executes perpetually. When the jīvas have the fortune of attaining sādhu-saṅga, the holy association of pure devotees, and their aversity is removed and they turn towards the Lord—the very same Durgā, by the wish of Govinda, becomes the cause of their liberation.

So it is conducive to show the 'warden', Durgā, one's reformed favourable attitude, to satisfy her and gain her undeceiving grace. Wealth, successful agriculture, assurance of the health of one's family members, etc.—one should know all such benedictions as the *deceptive* grace of Durgā. For the delusion of souls averse to Kṛṣṇa, Durgā manifests in the mundane world her ten forms known as Daśa-mahāvidyā showing their 'worldly psychic pastimes'.

The soul is a particle of consciousness. When he commits the offence of aversity to the service of Kṛṣṇa, he is pulled by Māyā's attracting potency; as soon as he is thus distracted, Durgā restricts him to a gross body of the five basic mundane elements, their attributes, and eleven senses, which is like a prisoner's uniform; then she hurls him into the wheel of karma. Revolving within that cycle, the jīva experiences joy and sorrow, heaven and hell, and so on. Besides this, she gives him, within the gross body, a subtle body consisting of the mind, intelligence and ego. Upon leaving one gross body, the jīva, in that subtle body, takes shelter within another gross body. Until he is liberated he cannot leave his subtle body, which is composed of evil desires. When the subtle body is given up, he bathes in the waters of the Virajā River and goes to the abode of Lord Hari.

Durgā performs all these tasks by the will of Govinda. *Vilajjamānayā yasya sthātum īkṣā-pathe 'muyā, vimohitā vikatthante mamāham iti durddhiyaḥ*. In this statement of *Bhāgavatam*, Durgā's relationship with the jīvas averse to Kṛṣṇa has been described. This is the Durgā who is worshipped in the mundane world. But the Durgā mentioned in the mantra which is the outer covering of the abode of the Lord—She is the transcendental maidservant of Kṛṣṇa. The shadow-Durgā executes the duties of the world as Her maidservant. Vide (Śrī Jīva's Sanskrit) commentary on the third śloka.
