## Verse 45

    kṣīraṁ yathā dadhi vikāra-viśeṣa-yogāt
    sañjāyate na hi tataḥ pṛthag asti hetoḥ
    yaḥ śambhutām api tathā samupaiti kāryād
    govindam ādi puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

### Translation

    As milk becomes transformed
        into yoghurt by reacting with an added agent,
    yet yoghurt is not separate from its origin—milk,
        similarly, for accomplishing a particular task,
    He who assumes the nature of 'Śambhu'—
        that Primeval Lord, Govinda, do I worship.

### Purport

(The innate nature of the aforementioned Śambhu, the presiding deity of Maheś Dhām, is being elucidated.) Śambhu is not 'another God' separate from Kṛṣṇa. Those who hold such a biased view are blasphemers of the Supreme Lord. Śambhu's control is subject to the control of Govinda, and so They are actually nondifferent Truth. The symptom of Their nondifference is illustrated by the example that, as milk is transformed to assume the properties of yoghurt with the addition of an agent, similarly, although the Lord becomes transformed to assume another form, that form is dependent; that transformed aspect has no independence.

 Tamo-guṇa or the material quality of inertia, the quality of minuteness of the marginal potency, and a minute degree of a mixture of divine cognizance (saṁvit) and ecstasy (hlādinī)—all these elements combined constitute a particular transformation. The form of the distant aspect of the plenary portion of the Supreme Lord that is amalgamated with this transformation constitutes the halo of the divinity as the masculine generative organ Lord Śambhu form of Sadāśiva; and from Śambhu, Rudradeva is manifest.

In the work of creation as the efficient cause in the form of the aggregate material elements, in the work of sustenance by vanquishing certain demons, and for the purpose of executing the entire work of annihilation— Govinda descends as the Guṇ-avatār (descent pertaining to one of the three qualities of material nature) in the entity of Śambhu, who is a separated portion endowed with the nature of a plenary portion. Śambhu's aspect as 'Lord of time' has been corroborated in the scriptures, and the authoritative quotations have been cited in the (Sanskrit) commentary (of Śrī Jīva).

The purport of such statements in the *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam* as *Vaiṣṇavānāṁ yathā Śambhuḥ*, etc., where Śambhu's glories as a Vaiṣṇava are extolled is that Śambhu, by his own potency of time, and subordinate to the will of Govinda, unites with Durgā Devī and accomplishes his tasks. In many scriptures headed by the Tantras he teaches religious forms that are a ladder for the jīvas of various qualifications to attain bhakti or devotion. By Govinda's sweet will, he (indirectly) protects and sustains śuddha-bhakti or pure devotion by preaching the doctrine of māyāvād (illusionism) and intellectual or imaginary fabrications of the scriptures.

The fifty qualities of the jīva are present within Śambhu in copious proportions, and five more great qualities unattainable by the ordinary jīvas are also found in him in partial proportion. So Śambhu cannot be categorized as a jīva; he is Lord of jīvas (Īśvara), although he partakes of the nature of a separated part (vibhinnāṁśa) of the Supreme Lord.
