## Verse 46

    dīpārchchir eva hi daśāntaram abhyupetya
    dīpāyate vivṛta-hetu-samāna-dharma
    yas tādṛg eva hi cha viṣṇutayā vibhāti
    govindam ādi puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

### Translation

    As the flame of one original lamp,
        when transmitted to another,
    burns separately as the expanded cause
        with the same nature of intensity,
    so also, He who shines in (Viṣṇu's) dynamic nature—
        that Primeval Lord, Govinda, do I worship.

### Purport

(Now, the presiding Deities of Hari Dhām, the plenary portions of the Lord who are known as Hari, Nārāyaṇ, Viṣṇu, etc., are being described.) Kṛṣṇa's Vilās-mūrti (plenary form possessing generally identical potency) is the Lord of Paravyoma (Vaikuṇṭha), Nārāyaṇ. Nārāyaṇ's expansion is the first predominative descent or Puruṣ-avatār (Kāraṇodakaśāyī), that Puruṣ-avatār's expansion is Garbhodakaśāyī and Garbhodakaśāyī's expansion is Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. The Lord's Name 'Viṣṇu' indicates Him to be the omniscient and the omnipresent.

In this śloka, by elucidating the position of Kṣīrodakaśāyī, the principle of the plenary expansion of the plenary expansion of the Lord is being elucidated. The Viṣṇu principle or descent of sattva-guṇa is quite distinct from the Śambhu principle of mixed māyik qualities and connotations. The intrinsic form of Govinda—Viṣṇu is also that form; both are the embodiment of pure existence. Viṣṇu, the manifest cause, is of the same nature as Govinda.

Because it is always adulterated to some degree by rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa, the sattva-guṇa of the threefold material qualities or guṇas is not pure. Brahmā appears in rajo-guṇa, and he is a separated portion (vibhinnāṁśa) possessing the influence of a plenary portion (svāṁśa); and Śambhu appears in māyā's tamo-guṇa, and he is similarly a separated portion possessing the influence of a plenary portion. They are separated portions because māyā's rajo- and tamo-guṇa are so estranged from unalloyed spirituality that Brahmā and Śambhu, who appear in those modes, are also greatly distanced from the Lord Himself (Svayaṁ-rūpa) or the Lord Himself showing a varied form (Tad-ekātma).

Despite the sattva-guṇa of māyā being alloyed with the other guṇas, Guṇ-avatār Viṣṇu makes His advent only in the unalloyed portion of sattva-guṇa—the portion of completely pure, transcendental existence. Thus Viṣṇu is the full plenary portion expansion (Svāṁśa-vilās) and the almighty entity (Maheśvar-tattva); He is not connected with māyā, yet He is the Master of māyā. Viṣṇu is the agent of Govinda's Own nature as the cause (of all expansions). All the majestic attributes of Govinda are present in His Vilās-mūrti plenary expansion Nārāyaṇ, that is, sixty qualities are present in Nārāyaṇ in full proportion. Therefore, although Viṣṇu is a Guṇ-avatār, or a descent in material nature, His personality is not alloyed with the guṇas or qualities of māyā as the personalities of Brahmā and Śiva are; the advent of Nārāyaṇ in the form of Mahā-Viṣṇu, the advent of Mahā-Viṣṇu in the form of Garbhodakaśāyī, and Viṣṇu's advent as Kṣīrodaśāyī—exemplifies the dynamic nature of the Absolute. Viṣṇu is the Godhead and the other two Guṇ-avatārs and all the gods are entities subordinate to Him, their offices delegated by Him.

Govinda is the original or supreme 'lamp'; from His Vilās-mūrti all the plenary or svāṁśa descents of Mahā-Viṣṇu, Garbhodakaśāyī, Kṣīrodakaśāyī, Rāma, etc., shine resplendently as individual lamps in Their respective locations by the transcendental potency of Govinda.[^1]

[^1]: The eternal form of Kṛṣṇa that is independent of any other form is known as Svayaṁ-rūpa; as corroborated in *Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā* 5.1. That form which is nondifferent from Svayaṁ-rūpa but manifests a different form and character is called *Tad-ekātma-rūpa*. Tad-ekātma-rūpa is of two types—vilās and svāṁśa. When by the play of Kṛṣṇa's inconceivable potency His generally similar form appears in a different form, it is called vilās. For example, the vilās form of Govinda is Nārāyaṇ, the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha; and the vilās form of the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha is Vāsudeva (of the first quadruple expansion). That form which, as in the case of vilās, is nondifferent from Svayaṁ-rūpa yet exhibits less power than the vilās form, is called svāṁśa. Examples are Saṅkarṣaṇ, Pradyumna, Aniruddha, etc., the three Puruṣa-avatārs headed by Mahā-Viṣṇu,§ the Līla-avatārs of Matsya, etc., the Manvantar-avatārs and the Yuga-avatārs. When Janārdan (Kṛṣṇa) allots His potencies of Knowledge, Devotion, Creation, Service, Universal Sustenance, Gravitational Force, Discipline of miscreants, etc., and infuses and empowers specially selected great entities with those potencies, they are known as Āveśa or Śaktyāveśāvatāras. Examples are the four Kumāras (Knowledge), Nārada (Devotion), Brahmā (Creation), Ananta (Gravity), Pṛthu (Sustenance), Paraśurāma (Discipline), and Śeṣa of Vaikuṇṭha (Service). In the tenth canto of *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam* (39th chapter), Akrūra is mentioned as having had the darśana of Śeṣa, Nārada, the Kumāras, etc., when immersing himself in the Yamunā for bath.

    This is the description of the three forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead called Svayaṁ-rūpa, Tad-ekātma-rūpa and Āveśa.

    The forms known as prakāśa cannot be reckoned as different from the Lord since they do not differ in any respect from the Lord's intrinsic form. Thus when the one form of the Lord appears simultaneously in many places (with the same Form, Qualities and Pastimes), that form is called prakāśa; for example, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was observed (once by Nārada) to be present in every palace of Dvārakā. The tenth canto *Bhāgavatam śloka, chitraṁ bataitat*, etc., is the evidence of this fact. Thus establishes the prakāśa form of the Supreme Lord.

    —*Śrī Laghu-Bhāgavatāmṛtam* 1.1.12-22

    *§Note*: Mahā-Viṣṇu=Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu=Kāraṇārṇavaśāyī Viṣṇu; Garbhodaśāyī=Garbhodakaśāyī; Kṣīrodaśāyī=Kṣīrodakaśāyī.
