## Verse 53

    dharmo 'tha pāpanichayaḥ śrutayas tapāṁsi
    brahmādi-kīṭa-patagāvadhayaś cha jīvāḥ
    yad datta-mātra-vibhava-prakaṭa-prabhāvā
    govindam ādi puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

### Translation

    I worship the Primeval Lord Govinda, by whose
        conferred power is manifest the potency in—religion,
    irreligion or all types of sins, the Śrutis, the penances and
        all beings from Brahmā to the worm and insect.

### Purport

Dharma, 'religion' or 'duty', refers to varṇa-dharma and āśrama-dharma or the socio-religious codes as given by the twenty books of law (Smṛti) whose origin is traced in the Vedas. Varṇa-dharma is the fourfold division according to men's natures of brāhmaṇ, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra. Āśrama-dharma refers to the fourfold formal religious gradations of brahmachārī, gṛhastha, vāna-prastha and sannyāsī for persons of the appropriate qualifications. All the codes of conduct for the human being have been delineated within these twofold dharmas of varna and āśrama.

'All kinds of sins' means the roots of sin—ignorance and sinful desire; and grave sins, less grave sins and general sins or mahāpātaka, anupātaka, pātaka, etc., that is, all types of illicit conduct. The Śrutis refers to the *Ṛg-, Sāma-, Yajur-* and *Atharva-veda* along with the Upaniṣads which form the crest-jewels of the Vedas. 'The penances' refers to whatever practices are to be learned for the furtherance of righteousness or religion. In many instances very painful austerities called pañca-tapā, etc., are indicated (in pursuance of eightfold-yoga, or Brahman liberation).

All the above forms are within the purview of the cycle of mundane work or karma of the conditioned souls who wander throughout 8,400,000 species of life, including gods, demons, humans, Nāgas, Kinnaras, Gandharvas, etc. They range unlimitedly from Brahmā down to the insignificant insect. Each possess a certain potency giving them proficiency in certain functions, but those potencies are not axiomatic—they are only the manifestation of whatever might is sanctioned for them by Śrī Govinda.
