## Verse 54

    yas tv indragopam athavendram aho svakarma-
    bandhānurūpa-phala-bhājanam ātanoti
    karmāṇi nirdahati kiṁ tu cha bhakti-bhājāṁ
    govindam ādi puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

### Translation

    Whether one may be the tiny insect 'Indragopa'
        or the great King of the gods, Lord Indra,
    He impartially awards all souls on the path of karma
        the fruits befitting their deeds;
    yet it is so wonderful! He burns at the root
        all the karma of the souls who adore Him—
    I worship Him, that Primeval Lord Govinda.

### Purport

The Supreme Lord is impartial in awarding the conditioned souls the fruits of their karma or mundane deeds; according to their previous actions He awards them their future engagements. But He gives His special grace to His devotees. He purges out, by the fire of ordeal, all their righteous or unrighteous karma along with its root, that is, the desire to perform karma, and nescience.

Although karma is beginningless, it is nonetheless destructible. Karma is indestructible for those who act in the hope of enjoying the fruits of their actions; their vicious circle of karma can never be terminated. Even the religious duty of sannyāsa is a type of karma befitting a certain religious status; in that practice, as long as the practitioner remains hankering for its fruit of liberation, his observance of sannyāsa cannot please Kṛṣṇa or gain His grace. The sannyāsīs accrue the fruits of their karma, and even when their actions become desireless to the extreme they attain the paltry fruit of self-satisfaction (ātmārāmatā).

But those who are true devotees perpetually cultivate divine service to Kṛṣṇa in a way pleasing to Him, totally abandoning all semblance of fleeting desires and independent attempts of jñāna, karma, etc. Kṛṣṇa totally annihilates all their karma, desires for karma, and nescience. Despite His impartiality, Kṛṣṇa's partiality to His devotees is a matter of marvel.
