## Verse 55

    yaṁ krodha-kāma-sahaja-praṇayādi-bhīti-
    vātsalya-moha-guru-gaurava-sevya-bhāvaiḥ
    sañchintya tasya sadṛśīṁ tanum āpur ete
    govindam ādi puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

### Translation

    Those who cultivate their thoughts of Him
        through anger, amour, natural friendship, fear,
    parenthood, delusion, reverence, and servitorship,
        attain to bodies of a form and nature
    appropriate to the mood of their meditation.
        I worship that Primeval Lord Govinda. 

### Purport

Devotion is generally of two types: regulative and spontaneous, or vaidhī and rāgātmikā. Devotion of preliminary faith aroused by following the instructions of the Guru and the scriptures is actuated by obligation to scriptural injunctions, and so devotional sentiment is always limited in that sphere. However, such regulative devotion becomes loving spontaneity when the devotee's attempts to please the Lord by his service gradually deepen. When bhāva or the budding stage of divine love is aroused, the devotee can become a recipient of Kṛṣṇa's grace. To attain this stage takes much time, and such an attempt through devotional service regulated by reverence and scriptural edicts is known as vaidhī-bhakti.

 Rāgātmikā-bhakti, devotion based on the pure heart's sentiment or instinctive attachment, is superior. It bears fruits very swiftly and is the attractor of Kṛṣṇa Himself. The various forms it takes are described in this śloka.

 Śānta-bhāva or the heart's aptitude for peacefulness in reverence, dāsya-bhāva or the heart's aptitude for servitude in submission, sakhya-bhāva or the heart's aptitude for friendship in natural affection, vātsalya-bhāva or the heart's aptitude for parenthood, and madhura-bhāva or the heart's aptitude for amorous love—these five are in the scope of rāgātmikā-bhakti.

Despite being spontaneous impulses (rāgātmikā), anger, fear and delusion are not devotion (bhakti) because these are hostile sentiments unconducive to devotion. Anger is seen in demons like Śiśupāla, fear is seen in demons like Kaṁsa, and delusion is found in the paṇḍits of the māyāvādī school. They all respectively have the feelings of anger, fear, and complete self-forgetfulness in identifying themselves with the Brahman. But none of these sentiments are conducive to devotion for the Lord, so none can be admitted to have the qualification of devotion. On the other hand, although of the above mentioned five rasas (of śānta, etc.), in the mood of peacefulness or śānta there is a predominance of indifference—it is almost devoid of devotional sentiment—it is nonetheless reckoned as devotion due to its favourability, however slight. There is abundant devotional sentiment in the other four moods.

In accordance with the Lord's promise in *Śrī Gītā* to reciprocate the attitude of a soul's surrender—*ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham*—those who foster the sentiments of anger, fear and delusion in relationship to the Lord attain to the swoon of sāyujya-mukti or 'liberation by merging'. The adherents of śānta attain to forms conducive to absorption in Brahman and Paramātmā. The adherents of dāsya and sakhya attain to appropriate male or female forms according to their qualifications. The adherents of vātsalya attain to forms appropriate for fatherly or motherly sentiments. And the adherents of śṛṅgāra attain to the pure forms of gopīs or spiritual milkmaids of Vraja.
