## Verse 56

    śriyaḥ kāntāḥ kāntaḥ parama-puruṣaḥ kalpataravo
    drumā bhūmiś chintāmaṇi-gaṇa-mayī toyam amṛtam
    kathā gānaṁ nāṭyaṁ gamanam api vaṁśī priyasakhī
    chid-ānandaṁ jyotiḥ param api tad āsvādyam api cha
    sa yatra kṣīrābdhiḥ sravati surabhībhyaś cha sumahān
    nimeṣārdhākhyo vā vrajati na hi yatrāpi samayaḥ
    bhaje śvetadvīpaṁ tam aham iha golokam iti yaṁ
    vidantas te santaḥ kṣiti-virala-chārāḥ katipaye

### Translation

    That place where the divine Goddesses of Fortune
        are the beloved,
    and Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Male,
        is the only lover;
    all the trees are divine wish-fulfilling trees,
        the soil is made of transcendental gems
    and the water is nectar;
        where every word is a song,
    every movement is dancing,
        the flute is the dearmost companion,
    sunlight and moonlight are divine ecstasy,
        and all that be is divine, and enjoyable;
    where a great ocean of milk eternally flows
        from the udders of billions of Surabhī cows
    and the divine time is eternally present,
        never suffering the estrangement of past and future
    for even a split second ...
        that supreme transcendental abode of Śvetadvīpa
    do I adore.
        Practically no one in this world knows that place
    but for only a few pure devotees—
        and they know it as Goloka. 

### Purport

The place that is reached by the jīvas through the highest loving service is completely transcendental. Despite that, it is never nondifferentiated or without attributes. The nondifferentiative plane of Brahman is attained by the jīvas through the sentiments of anger, fear and delusion. But the devotees reach the transcendental world of Paravyoma-Vaikuṇṭha or above that, Goloka, according to their individual rasa or pure devotional heart's disposition.

In fact, that supreme holy abode of Goloka is 'Śvetadvīpa'—white or effulgent island—on account of its extreme purity. Persons who attain to the ultimate joy of perfection in pure devotion during their sojourn in this mundane world see the plane of Śvetadvīpa within Gokula-Vṛndāvan and Nabadwip in this world. They speak of it as 'Goloka'. There in Goloka, in all the beauty of transcendental variegatedness are found the beloved, lover, trees, vines, earth (mountains, rivers and forests), water, speech, movement, the flute-song, moon and sun, the enjoyed, enjoyment (the inconceivable wonders of the sixty-four arts), the cows, the nectarine flow of milk and the transcendental time of the eternal present.

Descriptions with the underlying conception of Goloka are found in many places in the Vedas and other scriptures such as the Purāṇas, Tantras, etc. It is stated in the *Chāndogya-upaniṣad, sa brūyād yāvān vā ayam ākāśas tāvān eṣo 'ntar hṛdaya ākāśa ubhe asmin dyāv āpṛthivī antar eva samāhite ubhāv agniś cha vāyuś cha sūryāchandramasāv ubhau vidyun nakṣatrāṇi yach chāsyehāsti yach cha nāsti sarvaṁ tad asmin samāhitam iti*.

The purport underlying this statement is that, as many facets of variegatedness are found in the mundane world, all these and much more—myriads of excellences—are found in Goloka. The variegatedness and excellences of Goloka are centralized and harmonious, whereas those of the mundane world are disjointed and unharmonious and thus the cause of mixed happiness and unhappiness. The harmonious variegatedness and excellences are pearl-white and full of transcendental ecstasy.

By dint of śuddha-bhakti-samādhi, the harmonious centralization of the pure heart filled with divine devotion, the Vedas personified and saintly devotees practising devotion revealed by the Vedas can actually see that holy abode when they look inwards toward the current of the pure consciousness that pervades their devoted, surrendered hearts. By the power of Kṛṣṇa's grace, their minute cognitive faculties take on an infinite nature and they attain equal enjoyment with Kṛṣṇa in the Dhām.

There is a deep meaning to the line *param api tad āsvādyam api cha. Param api* indicates that 'Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate in the infinite expanse of transcendental ecstasy', and *tad āsvādyam api* means 'even His enjoyable truth'. The glory of Rādhikā's love, the nectarine sweetness of Kṛṣṇa that Rādhikā experiences and the joy that Rādhikā feels from that experience—when Kṛṣṇa feels the need to taste (āsvādyam) these three heart's sentiments, He becomes golden—Gaura. That golden quality of His—is His manifest ecstasy of nectarine service, and this is also eternally present in Śvetadvīpa.
