## Verse 59

    pramāṇais tat sadāchārais tad abhyāsair nirantaram
    bodhayann ātmanātmānaṁ bhaktim apy uttamāṁ labhet

### Translation

Supreme devotion is attained by gradually increasing perception of one's intrinsic self through constant self-cultivation following authority, virtuous practices and practising spiritual life.

### Purport

'Authority' refers to the scriptures that teach us about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, such as the Vedas, Purāṇas, *Śrīmad Bhagavad-Gītā*, etc. 'Virtuous practices' refers to the practices of the true devotee saints, and the practices inspired by the divine love in the hearts of the pure devotees who follow the path of love for the Lord. By 'practising spiritual life' it is meant that one should learn about the *Daśa-mūla* or Ten Fundamental Divine Principles from the scriptures, and after receiving as directed therein the Holy Name of the Lord—embodying His Name, Form, Qualities and Pastimes—one should go on with the constant practice of His divine service, taking the Name regularly every day.

It must be clearly understood that in this practising spiritual life, scriptural cultivation and saintly association (sādhu-saṅga) are necessary. When virtuous practices are combined with the service of the Name, the ten offences to the Holy Name can no longer endure. To faithfully follow the sādhus who hear and chant the glories of the Name without any trace of offence is the true practising of spiritual life. In the heart of one who faithfully continues his practising spiritual life in this line, the objective, which is devotion in divine love, makes Her gracious appearance.
