## Verse 61

    dharmān anyān parityajya mām ekaṁ bhaja viśvasan
    yādṛśī yādṛśī śraddhā siddhir bhavati tādṛśī
    kurvan nirantaraṁ karma loko yam anuvartate
    tenaiva karmaṇā dhyāyan māṁ parāṁ bhaktim ichchhati

### Translation

Abandon all other types of religion and serve Me with resolve. One will attain perfection according to the nature of his faith. Perpetually pursuing worldly occupations or karma, the people of the world remain in the world. Meditate upon Me through the execution of your particular work, and you will attain to loving devotion, the supreme transcendental devotion.

### Purport

The dharma—'religion', 'nature' or 'function' of the character of pure devotion, śuddha-bhakti—is the actual jaiva-dharma or eternal nature and original function of the soul. As many other 'religions' may be found in the world, every one of them are superficial in comparison to the original function. The superficial dharmas are numerous, including the cultivation of jñāna or knowledge of Brahman aiming at nirvāṇa (cessation of embodied existence); the eightfold and allied forms of yoga aiming at 'becoming one' with the Supersoul; pious worldly works by the way of karma-kāṇḍa aiming at mundane pleasures; jñāna-yoga as a relative combination of karma and jñāna; and barren renunciation.

The Lord is saying, "Give up all these attempts and embrace the religion of bhakti—devotion—which has its roots in śraddhā—faith—and serve and adore Me. Exclusive faith in Me is 'resolve' (*viśvāsa*); that resolute faith gradually becomes more and more lucid, and from that develops niṣṭhā, ruchi, āsakti and bhāva—firmness, taste, depth in taste, and heartfelt sentiment of divine love. Perfection is attained in proportion to the purity of one's faith."

If the question is raised, "If in this way one is to be constantly engaged in pursuing perfection in devotion, how will he maintain his body, and how will the world go on? And when society and one's body cease to function, how will a man pursue perfection in devotion when he's dead?"—then in order to slash such a doubt, the Lord is saying, "The karma or work that the people of this plane sustain the world by—execute that as a meditation and destroy the karmic or exploitative nature of those actions, and establish their devotional quality."

Man passes his life by engaging in three types of actions: bodily, mental and social. The manifold bodily activities include eating, sitting, walking, reclining, sleeping, evacuating, dressing, etc.; the mental activities include thought, remembrance, concentration, realization, feeling happiness and unhappiness, etc.; and the social activities include marriage, the relationship of ruler and subject, brotherhood, assemblies for performing sacrifice, public welfare works, family maintenance, receiving guests, customary formalities, offering due respect to others, etc.

When these actions are performed for the sake of one's own enjoyment, they are known as karma-kāṇḍa; when they are performed for an opportunity of attaining enlightenment, they are known as karma-yoga or jñāna-yoga; and when they are executed as functions conducive to the practising life of devotion, they are known as gauṇa-bhakti-yoga or the indirect application of devotion. But only action that is symptomized by pure worship is known as direct devotion.

Thus the Lord is saying, "Your every act will be meditation upon Me when you give due time to practising direct devotion whilst otherwise rendering indirect devotion in accordance with the formalities demanded by the world." In this respect, despite acting in the world—'performing karma'—the jīva does not become averse to the service of the Lord by turning outward to mundane trappings.

This way of activity is the practice of turning inward; as it is stated in the *Īśopaniṣad*, ॥ *īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvaṁ yat kiñ cha jagatyāṁ jagat, tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā mā gṛdhaḥ kasyachid dhanam*. Our revered commentator has stated, *tena īśa-tyaktena visṛṣṭena*. The purport is that whatever one accepts, when everything is accepted as one's fortune of receiving the prasāda or grace of the Lord, then actions lose their quality of karma and take on the quality of bhakti. Therefore, the *Īśopaniṣad* states, *kurvan eveha karmaṇi jijīviśech chataṁ samāḥ, evaṁ tvayi nānyatheto 'sti na karma lipyate nare*: if one acts in this way, even if he lives for hundreds of years he cannot be daubed by karma.

The liberationist or jñāna-oriented interpretation of these two mantras is 'renunciation of the fruits of work'; but from the standpoint of bhakti, the purport is to gain the grace or prasāda of the Lord by offering everything to Him. So worldly occupations are to be executed along with the meditation of remembering the worship of the Supreme Lord in *archana-mārga* or the path of due reverence for the Deity.

Now, Brahmā has a desire in his heart for creation. If that desire is fulfilled along with the meditation of following the order of the Lord, by virtue of that action possessing the symptom of surrender to the Lord, it will be an indirect religious function favourable to the nourishment of and within the purview of devotion. This is the reasonable way of the Lord's instruction to Brahmā.

The jīva who has attained to bhāva or internal, heartfelt devotion, is naturally indifferent to all but Kṛṣṇa, and so such an instruction does not apply in his case.
