## Verse 62

    ahaṁ hi viśvasya charācharasya
    bījaṁ pradhānāṁ prakṛtiḥ pumāṁś cha
    mayāhitaṁ teja idaṁ vibharṣi
    vidhe vidhehi tvam atho jaganti
    
    iti śrī-brahma-saṁhitāyāṁ bhagavat-siddhānta-saṅgrahe
    mūla-sūtrākhyaḥ pañchamo 'dhyāyaḥ

### Translation

Hear Me, O Vidhe! I am the seed—the Primal Principle of the world of moving and stationary beings; I am the elements, I am the predominated, I am the predominator. The fiery spirit of Brahman that abides in you has been conferred unto you by Me; now, adopting that prowess, create the world of moving and stationary beings.

### Purport

Some philosophers conclude that the undifferentiated element of Brahman becomes transformed and takes on the appearance of having attributes in the form of this mundane world; or māyā becomes divided and becomes the mundane world, and undivided it is Brahman, or Brahman is the 'object' and the world is its 'reflection'; or the entire world is the jīva's illusion. Others think that by nature God is 'the one', the soul is 'the one', and although the universe or mundane world is 'the one principle', it is eternally distinct in an independent manner; or God is the absolute 'specific', and the relative, both spirit and matter, are the 'specified'—yet all are one truth. Others think that by dint of inconceivable potency the truth sometimes appears as one, sometimes as dual. Yet others conclude that the doctrine of an impotent 'one' is meaningless, so Brahman is replete with pure potency, and it is the eternally pure, one-without-a-second truth."

All these theories have their origin in the Vedas, with support in the *Vedānta-sūtras*. Although none of them can claim to expound the truth in every respect, each carry a certain degree of truth. They—not to mention the theories of Sāṅkhya, Pātañjala, Nyāya and Vaiśeṣika that are all contradictory to the Vedic teachings, and the theories such as Pūrva-mīmāmsā, etc., that solely favour fruitive pursuits in conformity with a section of the Vedas—owe their existence to their superficial reliance upon the *Vedānta*.

(Thus, the Lord says to Brahmā,) "You and your pure divine succession are to abandon all these theories and accept the supreme principle of achintya-bhedābheda—inconceivable simultaneous oneness and distinction. Then you will be able to become a true devotee."

The underlying gist of the Lord's words is, "The animate world is composed of jīvas and the inanimate world is composed of matter. Of these, My divine potency (parā-śakti)—by its marginal power—has manifest the jīvas; and my secondary potency (aparā-śakti) has manifest the material world. I am the seed of everything: in a form nondifferent from each of those potencies of Mine, I control them by the potency of My will. By various stages of transformations, those potencies have become pradhāna (the elements), prakrti (the predominated) and puruṣa (the predominator). So although as the potency principle I am pradhāna, prakrti and puruṣa, as the potent principle I am eternally distinct from all those potencies. Such simultaneous oneness and distinction has come into being by virtue of My inconceivable potency.

"Therefore, embracing the wisdom of the correlation of the inconceivably one and distinct entities of 'the soul', 'the world' and 'Kṛṣṇa', let the attainment of divine love for Kṛṣṇa by the practice of pure devotion be the eternal divine teaching handed down in your divine succession."

    jīvābhaya-pradā vrttir jīvāśaya-prakāśinī
    krta bhaktivinodena surabhī-kuñja-vāṣinā

    iti śrī-brahma-saṁhitāya bhagavat-siddhānta-saṅgrahe
    mūla-sūtrākhya pañchama adhyāyera
    'prakāśinī'-nāmni gaudīya-vrtti samāpta

**This Prakāśinī-vṛtti Commentary-**\
**the queller of the apprehension of Jīva,**\
**the illuminator of the deep purport of Jīva,**\
**was penned by Śrī Bhakti Vinod**\
**residing at Surabhī Kuñja.**

**Thus concludes the Prakāśinī Gaudiya Illumination**\
**of the Quintessence of Reality the Beautiful**\
**Fifth Chapter, Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā**
